<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Philological Proofs of the Original Unity and Recent Origin of the Human Race</title>
      <author><name reg="Johnes, Arthur James">Arthur James Johnes</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>February 4, 2011</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">35167</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2011-02-04">February 4, 2011</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Bryan Ness, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This book was produced from images generously made available by The Internet
            Archive/Million Book Project.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Philological Proofs</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">of the</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Original Unity and Recent Origin</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">of the</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Human Race</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Derived From a Comparison of the Languages of Asia, Europe, Africa, and America</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Being an Inquiry How Far the Differences in the Languages of the Globe are Referrible to Causes Now in Operation.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Arthur James Johnes, Esq.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center"><hi rend='italic'>Eam linguam (primævam) Hebræi suam dicunt, Syri suam, Verius
asseritur primævam linguam nullibi puram extare, sed reliquias ejus
esse in omnibus linguis.</hi>  <hi rend='smallcaps'>Grotius</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Annot. Genes</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>xi</hi>.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">London:</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">John Russell Smith</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">4, Old Compton Street, Soho Square</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1846</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Dedication.</head>

<p>
TO
</p>

<p>
LADY HALL OF LLANOVER.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>My Lady</hi>,
</p>

<p>
This volume has been published in consequence of
the following opinion expressed by Dr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Prichard</hi>
on an Essay written by the Author for a National
Society, in whose proceedings your Ladyship takes a
lively interest:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>This Essay contains very valuable matter, which
I trust we shall hereafter see in print.</q>
</quote>

<p>
Notwithstanding the deference which I consider
due to the sentiments of so eminent an authority,
had I committed to the press, without revision, the
hastily-written Essay to which he was thus pleased to
refer, I might have conformed to the letter, but I
should have violated the spirit of this very flattering
recommendation. Instead of so doing, I have availed
myself of such intervals of leisure as I have been able
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
to command from more imperative engagements in
maturing the conclusions embodied in the present
volume, of which only a very trifling portion consists
of the Essay in which it originated.
</p>

<p>
Independent of the numerous claims to the respect
and esteem of your countrymen, which your Ladyship
has earned by the warm attachment you have ever
evinced for the literature and institutions and for the
welfare of the Cymry, there is no other person to whom
I could, with equal justice, have dedicated a volume
which has been written in accordance with your Ladyship's
suggestion and request. For the same reason,
in inscribing these pages to your Ladyship, I have the
satisfaction of feeling that they will be received not
only with the indulgence required by all works which
are the fruit of intervals of professional leisure&mdash;but
also with that patriotic sympathy which you
never fail to extend to all investigations prompted by
national feelings and directed to subjects of national
interest.
</p>

<p>
I have the honour to remain,
</p>

<p>
Your Ladyship's
</p>

<p>
Very faithful and obedient servant,
</p>

<p>
THE AUTHOR.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='xiii'/><anchor id='Pgxiii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introduction.
On The Connexion Of The Conclusions Of This
Work With History, Sacred And Profane, And
With The Results Of Science.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Interpretation of the Passage commented on by Grotius. Mr.
Lyell's Geological Proofs of the Recent Origin of Man.
Grounds of Adelung's Opinion that Central Asia was the
Birthplace of the Human Race. Its Central Position and
High Elevation. Its Climate. It is the native Country of
Domestic Animals. This View consistent with the Scriptural
Narrative, and supported by ancient Indian Accounts.
<q>Ararat</q> of Scripture not in Armenia. Monosyllabic and
Polysyllabic Languages. Dr. Prichard on the Origin of
different Races. The Dispersion of Mankind probably very
rapid. Routes of Diffusion. Basques and Celts. Connexion
of the Welsh with Negro Dialects. The Peopling
of Islands. The Unity of the Human Species deduced
from the Uniformity of the Moral, Mental, and Social
Features of civilized and uncivilized Races. Egyptians
and Negroes. Ancient Gauls and Modern French. Tendencies
to Progression among Races yet uncivilized. The
N. A. Indian Tribe the Mandans. Imperfection of Modern
Civilization. The Siege of Genoa. The Hottentot Race.</hi>
</p>

<p>
In commenting on a celebrated passage of Scripture,
Grotius has adopted, with regard to the primitive language
of mankind, the conclusion expressed on the title-page.
</p>

<p>
<q>That Language the Hebrews say is the same as theirs&mdash;the
Syrians say it is the same as theirs. It may be asserted,
<pb n='xiv'/><anchor id='Pgxiv'/>
with more truth, that the Primitive Language is
not extant in a pure state anywhere, but that its <emph>remains
exist in all languages</emph>!</q>
</p>

<p>
Of the conclusion thus expressed by this celebrated writer&mdash;a
conclusion dictated by the intuitive sagacity of a great
mind&mdash;the facts developed in the following pages will be shown
to be confirmatory. All existing languages, when viewed
separately, are <emph>fragmentary and irregular</emph>. But when a wide
and extensive comparison is instituted, the <q>disjecta membra</q>
are found to reunite, and the irregularities to disappear!
</p>

<p>
Assuming the various languages of the Globe to have been
derived from one Original Speech, it will be established that
the formation of numerous distinct languages from that one
Primitive Tongue admits of a complete explanation, by means
of causes of which the agency can be traced within the range
of the Historical era. The influence of those causes will be
shown within a limited period of time to have produced dialects
which display&mdash;not a <emph>destruction</emph>&mdash;but a <emph>dispersion</emph> of
the elements of the Parent languages from which <emph>they are
known to have arisen</emph>. In other words, these dialects manifest
the <emph>same relative features</emph> as are exhibited by those languages
which were formed <emph>anterior to the period of History</emph>. The
only distinction is, that in the latter case the differences are
more numerous and extensive&mdash;a result which is obviously a
necessary consequence of a longer period of time.
</p>

<p>
Agreeably to an interpretation which has received very
high sanction, the event described in the passage referred to
in the title-page cannot be pronounced to have had any considerable
share in the production of Human Languages, for,
according to eminent authorities,<note place='foot'>See notes to D'Oyly and Mant's Bible. The differences, it is supposed, may
have consisted in a different mode of pronouncing the same words, such as exists
in various English counties, to a sufficient extent to make the speakers mutually
unintelligible! See, also, Eichhorn's view.</note> the changes thereby
<pb n='xv'/><anchor id='Pgxv'/>
caused probably consisted in mere Dialectic differences, not
materially affecting the Words or Structure of Language.
Moreover (it is inferred) the influence of that event did not
extend to the whole Human Race, but merely to that small
portion of it who were the ancestors of the Semetic or Syro-Phœnician
nations.
</p>

<p>
In these pages are embodied proofs, from Language, of
the two following propositions:&mdash;1. That the various nations
of our Globe are descended from one Parent Tribe. 2. That
the introduction of the Human Species into the system
to which it belongs, cannot be referred to an epoch more
ancient than the era indicated as the date of that event by
our received systems of chronology.
</p>

<p>
These propositions, of which the Philological evidence is
developed in this volume, are supported not only by the testimony
of History, Sacred and Profane, but also by the
highest Scientific authorities.
</p>

<p>
In Cuvier's theory of the Earth the date of the origin of
our species is discussed, not only on Geological but also on
Historical grounds, in a disquisition embracing an immense
mass of learning on the subject of the supposed antiquity of
the Chinese, Egyptians, and other nations who have laid
claim to a very remote origin. These pretensions are rejected,
and the date usually assigned to the origin of Man is adopted
in this celebrated work.
</p>

<p>
The same views have been expressed by Mr. Lyell; views
which he espouses, not merely as the result of his own
reasonings, but of the prevalent conclusions of the highest
geological authorities.
</p>

<p>
<q>I need not dwell,</q> he observes, <q>on the proofs of the
low antiquity of our species, for it is not controverted by
any experienced geologist; indeed the real difficulty consists
in tracing back the signs of man's existence on the
earth to that comparatively modern period when species,
<pb n='xvi'/><anchor id='Pgxvi'/>
now his contemporaries, began to predominate. If there
be a difference of opinion respecting the occurrence in
certain deposits of the Remains of Man, and his works,
it is always in reference to strata confessedly of the most
modern order, and it is never pretended that our race co-existed
with assemblages of Animals and Plants, of which
all or even a great part of the species are extinct. From
the concurrent testimony of history and tradition we learn
that parts of Europe now the most fertile, and most completely
subjected to the dominion of Man, were, less than
three thousand years ago, covered with forests, and the
abode of wild beasts. The archives of nature are in accordance
with historical records, and when we lay bare the
most superficial covering of peat we sometimes find therein
the canoes of the savage, together with huge antlers of the
wild stag, or horns of the wild bull. In caves now open
to the day, in various parts of Europe, the bones of large
beasts of prey occur in abundance, and they indicate that
at periods comparatively modern in the history of the globe
the ascendancy of man, if he existed at all, had scarcely
been felt by the brutes.</q><note place='foot'>Lyell's Geology, vol. i. p. 230.</note>
</p>

<p>
(See an analogous argument of Berkeley for the Recent
Origin of Man, quoted with approbation by Mr. Lyell,
vol. iii. p. 203.)
</p>

<p>
In what part of the Globe was the Human species first
introduced? On this interesting question various opinions
have existed, and very opposite theories have been propounded.
Sir Humphry Davy<note place='foot'>Consolations in Travel.</note> surmised that this locality
must have been somewhere in or near the Tropics, in a climate
suited to the tender childhood of the Race. Sir William
Jones fixed upon Persia or Iran.<note place='foot'>Discourse on the Origin and Families of Nations.</note> Adelung has concluded
<pb n='xvii'/><anchor id='Pgxvii'/>
in favour of a contiguous locality; viz., the regions of the
Indus, the borders of Cashmire and Tibet. It may be observed
also that his grounds, in some respects, coincide with
those adopted by Sir William Jones, who, after alluding to
the extensive and, as he conceives, fundamental differences
between the Languages of&mdash;1, The Persians and Indians,
Romans and Greeks, &amp;c.; 2, The Jews, Arabs, &amp;c.; 3, The
people of China and Japan; and 4, The Tartars&mdash;nations
whom, nevertheless, he conceives to have descended from
one pair&mdash;observes, <q>If, then, you consider the seats of
all the migrating nations as points in a surrounding figure,
you will perceive that the several rays, diverging from <hi rend='italic'>Iran</hi>,
may be drawn to them without any intersection; but this
will not happen, if you assume as a centre, <hi rend='italic'>Arabia</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>India</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Tartary</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>China</hi>: it follows that <hi rend='italic'>Iran</hi>, or
<hi rend='italic'>Persia</hi> (I contend for the <emph>meaning, not the name</emph>,) was the
central country which we sought.</q>
</p>

<p>
Adelung's<note place='foot'>Mithridates, vol. i.</note> Dissertation on this subject, which, as he
states, contains <q>the only hypothesis in which he has permitted
himself to indulge,</q> is characterized by profound
reasoning and graceful illustration. Considering their variety
and extent, his proofs seem to be conclusive, especially when
dissociated from the opinion which was entertained both by
himself and Sir William Jones, viz., that the languages of
the nations forming the diverging radii of migration are
fundamentally different. Of these languages the original
unity will be apparent, from the facts embodied in this work.
Adelung's grounds for selecting the Central Asiatic regions
of Cashmire and Tibet are&mdash;1. Their Geographical position
and high elevation, and the direction of their mountains and
rivers, which render these countries a natural source for the
diffusion of Population over the Globe. 2. Their Climate
<pb n='xviii'/><anchor id='Pgxviii'/>
and Natural productions. 3. The Ancient Indian accounts
which are corroborated by the Scriptural narrative. 4. In
these regions is the line which separates from other Asiatic
races the nations who exhibit the Mongol or Tartar Physiognomy.
5. The same line separates the Monosyllabic and
Polysyllabic Languages. 6. The Astronomical reasonings
of Bailly.
</p>

<div>
<head>1. Geographically.</head>

<p>
Central Asia forms a natural centre for the diffusion of
population over the Globe, as will appear from the following
passages from an authority by whom Adelung's views have
been adopted:<note place='foot'>Asia, by Carl Ritter and others.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Asia, exhibiting such characteristics in its outline, is no
less remarkable for the form of its surface, on which the
climate, and consequently the vegetation and animal kingdom,
of its different parts must chiefly depend. In examining
the other divisions of the globe, we find that
Australia exhibits level and comparatively low countries
without many high mountain-ranges, as far as we yet know.
Africa is divided into two nearly equal parts, the southern
of which forms an almost uniform table-land, whilst the
northern, with the exception of the Atlas region, may be
considered as a lowland. Europe contains plains of small
extent lying between dispersed mountain-groups and ridges;
but these plains are not confined to any particular parts.
In America the highest land lies on one side, occupying its
western coast from the extreme north to the south; it forms
the most extensive system of mountain-chains on the globe,
which inclose within their arms elevated plateaus, but of
comparatively small extent. <emph>Asia exhibits different features.
The whole mass of the interior continent rises to a considerable
<pb n='xix'/><anchor id='Pgxix'/>
elevation above the sea, and this elevated mass, of which
the high table-lands occupy by far the greatest extent, is not
placed at one of the extremities of the whole mass, but occupies
its centre.</emph></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>From these table-lands, which occupy the centre of Asia,
the surface descends in gradual and diversified terraces and
slopes to the lowlands which surround them.</q>
</p>

<p>
After stating that these table-lands consist of two terraces,
(viz. an Eastern system, composed of Tibet and the Great
Desert, called Gobi, and a Western terrace, including Iran
or Persia,) which unite where the ranges of the Himalaya,
Hindu-Kuh, Thsungling, and Belur Tagh meet, the same
writer thus alludes to the regions which form the point of
junction:
</p>

<p>
<q>Such a juxta-position of all the great features which nature
exhibits on the surface of the globe, on such a colossal
scale, and in so limited a space, makes this one of the most
remarkable spots on the face of our planet. This maximum
of the contrasts of natural features, placed in the centre of
the continent, is the principal characteristic which distinguishes
Asia. By drawing a circle with a radius of a few
hundred miles round this common centre, we comprehend
in it the countries of Cashmere, Sogdiana, and Cabulistan,
the ancient empires of Bactria, Delhi, and Samarcand, the
cold table-lands of Tibet, of Khotan, and of Kashgar, up
to the ancient Seres and Paropamisadæ.</q>
</p>

<p>
Further, the same writer, after describing the immense variety
of climate that occurs within this limited space, adds:
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>From the extremity of these table-lands, especially on
the <emph>south-east and north-east, south-west and north-west</emph>,
there issue several separate mountain-chains, not connected
with one another, but which form more or less a part of
the table-lands themselves.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<pb n='xx'/><anchor id='Pgxx'/>

<p>
<q><emph>The valleys, which are produced by this indentation on the
borders of the table-lands, offer peculiar advantages for the
progress of civilization.</emph> For, as we have already observed,
the highland of Asia does not sink on <emph>one side only</emph>, but on
<emph>all sides</emph> and towards every point of the compass; it also
sinks towards <emph>different</emph> oceans, which are separated from
the highland by extensive plains, varying greatly in magnitude
and form. This circumstance, added to the valleys
formed by the indentations in the exterior margins of the
highlands, has given rise to numerous and most extensive
<emph>river systems</emph>, which, descending through the intervening
terraces, direct their winding course <emph>towards the north,
south, west, and east</emph>, and thus give to <emph>the distant internal
countries of this continent the advantage of an easy communication
with the ocean</emph>.</q>
</p>

<div>
<head>2. The Climate and Natural productions of Cashmire and
Tibet.</head>

<p>
Influenced solely by its high elevation, De Pauw, Zimmerman,
and Pallas concluded that Central Asia must have been
the birthplace of the human race. To this conclusion the
rigorous climate of those parts of it which were best known
to them appeared to present an insuperable objection. But
as Adelung observes, those regions of Central Asia which
border upon the Indus have been shown by the accounts of
travellers to fulfil all the requisite conditions in this respect.
Had these celebrated writers been possessed of the information
these accounts contain, they might have discovered
in Cashmire a suitable locality for the first abode of man, in
Tibet a fitting school of discipline to prepare him for the
various climes and countries he was destined to inhabit!
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cashmire.</hi> Adelung's description of this enchanting
country calls to mind in many of its features the <q>Happy
Valley</q> in Rasselas!
</p>

<pb n='xxi'/><anchor id='Pgxxi'/>

<p>
The faculties with which man has been endowed enable him
to contend with the most unfavorable climes: but not until
these faculties have been ripened by Time and experience!
At his first creation he required an abode where nature's free
bounty would supply all his wants; in fine he needed, with
reference even to his mere physical necessities, a Paradise!
To this appellation no country in Asia can assert a better
claim than the lovely land of Cashmire, which is, in fact, a
mere Valley, separated by inaccessible mountains from India,
Persia, and Tibet! Owing to its high elevation, the heat of
the South is tempered into a perpetual Spring, and nature
here puts forth all her powers to bring all her works, Plants,
Animals, and Man, to the highest state of perfection!
Cashmire is a region of fruitful hills, countless fountains and
streams, which unite in the River Behut, that, like the Pison
of Paradise, <q>compasseth the whole land!</q>
</p>

<p>
Bernier found here all Asiatic and European fruits in perfection.
The Pisang, undoubtedly the same tree as the fig
tree of the Book of Genesis,<note place='foot'>Genesis, c. iii. v. 7, <q>And they sewed fig-leaves together, and made themselves
aprons.</q></note> grows no where so large or so
beautiful as in Cashmire!
</p>

<p>
Even the men of this country are distinguished among
Asiatics by superior natural endowments, mental and physical.
They have none of the Tartar physiognomy, but exhibit the
finest features of the European race; while in genius and intelligence
they surpass most other Oriental nations! Cashmire
was at one time governed by kings of its own; it was afterwards
subject to the Moguls of India, who ruled it with gentleness
on account of its beauty! On their downfall it fell
under the sway of the rude Affghans.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tibet.</hi> This contiguous country unites within itself the
temperatures and products of the most opposite of those
<pb n='xxii'/><anchor id='Pgxxii'/>
climes in which man was intended to dwell, combining
mountains crowned with perpetual snow and icebergs,
with valleys in which never-ending Summer blooms. Tibet
also presents, in a native or indigenous state, the various
Plants and Animals which have been domesticated by Man!
Here are found in a wild state the Vine, the Rice-plant, the
Pea, the Ox, the Horse, the Ass, the Sheep, the Goat, the
Camel, the Pig, the Cat, and even the Reindeer, <q>his only
friend and companion in the polar wastes.</q><note place='foot'>Adelung quotes Zimmerman to the effect that of the animals found in Europe
all have been derived from Asia, with the exception of sixteen or seventeen kinds,
and these are mostly Mice and Bats.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>3. The Scriptural and Indian Accounts.</head>

<p>
It is extremely remarkable that the Indian accounts, of
which the antiquity is believed to be equal to that of the
Scriptural narrative, (see p. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>,) actually fix the first abode
of Man on Mount Meru, on the borders of Tibet and
Cashmire! Blended though they are with fable, it is impossible
to see how we can refuse to attach some weight to these
venerable remains, harmonising, so completely as they do,
with the conclusions formed on other grounds by some of the
greatest men of modern times, as regards the date and the
locality of the first introduction of our species; for if, on the
one hand, the received date of the origin of the human race
be authentic according to the views of Cuvier, and if, on the
other, the date of the Indian Vedas be such as accords with
the opinions of Sir William Jones and other eminent authorities,
the intervening period must have been too brief to efface
a traditionary reminiscence of the early history of our species,
(see p. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.) The correspondence of the Indian with the
Scriptural narrative is in many features very extraordinary.
We have a similar account of the creation of the world, of
the early history of man, of a primitive state of virtue and
<pb n='xxiii'/><anchor id='Pgxxiii'/>
happiness, of the fall of man, of a tree of life and death.<note place='foot'><q>A Tree well known in India, called the Tschiampa. It fruit is like an
Apple, and it is said to bear both good and evil fruit!</q></note>
We have also a Serpent that poisons the water, which is the
source of life!
</p>

<p>
Adelung notices a feature in which the locality fixed upon
as the birthplace of man by the Indian traditions corresponds
with the Paradise of Scripture. From Mount Meru spring
four Rivers, the Ganges, the Buramputur, the Indus, and
another stream that flows into Tibet. <q>Now Michaelis,</q> he
observes, <q>translates Genesis, ii. 10, <q>Four rivers flowed
out of Eden, and they <emph>separated continually more and more
widely from each other</emph>!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
Cashmire is considered by the Hindoos in the light of a
Holy Land, the cradle of their race, their civilization, and
their religion!
</p>

<p>
The Scriptural narrative, in describing the Creation of our
species, does not define the first abode of man any further
than by fixing it in <q>the East,</q> (Genesis, ii. 8,) an expression
corroborative, as Adelung observes, of the Indian traditions,
for in the time of Moses this expression was applicable to the
regions of the Indus. On the other hand, the common interpretation
of Genesis, viii. 4, which assumes that Ararat in
Armenia was the centre of diffusion of population after the
Flood, is irreconcilable with those accounts, this locality being
not to the East but to the North of all the Syro-Phœnician
or Scriptural regions. But according to Bohlen,<note place='foot'>Bohlen (Prof. Theol. zu Königsberg) auf Genesis.</note> the impression
that Ararat in this verse means the mountain of that
name in Armenia, which is inaccessible, crowned with perpetual
snow,<note place='foot'>Morier.</note> and <emph>anciently had a different name</emph>, is erroneous.
Ararat, he observes, does not mean a mountain but a country
in this verse and elsewhere in Scripture. Thus the sons of
<pb n='xxiv'/><anchor id='Pgxxiv'/>
Sennacherib escaped into the land of Ararat, (II. Kings, xix.
37,) and the Prophet Jeremiah calls upon the kingdoms of
Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenaz to rise up together with the
Medes against Babylon, (Jerem. li, 27-8) Ararat in these
passages, it may be suggested, may naturally be interpreted
to apply generally to the kingdoms and regions of the unexplored<note place='foot'><q>Unexplored</q> with reference to the Semetic nations.</note>
table-land of Central Asia, which commences on the
Persian borders, immediately to the East of Assyria. Moreover
the supposition that the Ararat of Scripture was in
Armenia may be regarded as irreconcilable with another
important passage, Gen., xi. 2, which distinctly implies that
the emigrants who reached the plain of Shinar, and who, it
may be inferred, were the first colonists of South Western
Asia, had journeyed thither from some region far to the
<q>East</q> of all the Semetic countries, of which Shinar or
Mesopotamia forms the Eastern border!
</p>

<p>
It is remarkable that the expressions of this passage&mdash;<q>And
it came to pass, as they journeyed from <emph>the East</emph>, that they
found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there</q>&mdash;harmonise
in the most perfect manner not only with the
Indian remains, but also with the passages first referred to
from the Scriptural narrative itself with respect to the first
abode of the human race, for it will be seen by the map that
1, Cashmire lies in <emph>a direct line</emph> to <q>the East</q> of Shinar or
Mesopotamia! 2, The whole intervening territory is occupied
by the Central-Asiatic table-land of Persia or Iran, which,
as previously noticed, forms one <emph>continual descent</emph> from its
highest elevation on the borders of Cashmire to its termination
near the plain of Shinar! Ar-ar-at may reasonably
be inferred to be nothing else than a term commonly applied
in the East to <q>a country of lofty mountains,</q> (see p. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>,)
an expression highly appropriate to the Persian table-land
<pb n='xxv'/><anchor id='Pgxxv'/>
both at its centre, and at its junction with the Semetic regions,
near the banks of the Tigris and the Euphrates! (See Ritter.)
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>4. Physiognomy.</head>

<p>
As before observed, in these regions are found in juxtaposition
nations which exhibit the very opposite Physiological
characteristics of the Mongol and Western Asiatic races.
The people of Tibet display the former, those of Cashmire
the latter.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>5. Philology.</head>

<p>
Here the Monosyllabic and Polysyllabic languages branch
off from a common centre. The former begin in Tibet, the
latter in Cashmire.
</p>

<p>
The Monosyllabic languages which prevail in Tibet, China,
Ava, Pegu, Siam, Tonquin, and Cochin China, countries
which contain a population of 180 millions, betray all the
rudeness of human speech in its infancy. They have no
compound words and no grammar. <q>The same sound,</q> says
Adelung, <q>which means <hi rend='italic'>Joy</hi>, means also <hi rend='italic'>Joyful</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>To rejoice</hi>
through all persons, numbers, and tenses!</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<q>They form their plural like a child, either by repetition,
as <q><hi rend='italic'>Tree-tree</hi></q> (i.e. <q>Trees</q>), or by means of an additional
word, as <q><hi rend='italic'>Tree-many! Tree-other!</hi></q> When the great grown-up
child is heard stammering <q><hi rend='italic'>Be Heaven, I Other,</hi><note place='foot'><q>I</q> (with <q>Other</q> added) means <q>We.</q></note> <hi rend='italic'>Father
which</hi>,</q> who but another child like him can guess that this
means <q><hi rend='italic'>Our Father which art in Heaven!</hi></q></q>
</p>

<p>
The imperfection of the Monosyllabic languages does not
arise solely from their consisting of Monosyllables, but from
the want of the more refined grammatical forms which are
found in all other Tongues, even those of the wildest American
Tribes. No nation, however uncivilized, that had once acquired
<pb n='xxvi'/><anchor id='Pgxxvi'/>
a knowledge of these would ever fall back <q>to the
speech of childhood!</q> Hence Adelung infers that the
Chinese, &amp;c. must have been completely separated at an early
period from the other races of men. But it will be asked,
Why is it that the Chinese have remained stationary in this
respect, while nations far inferior to them in every other
point of view have surpassed them in this one instance?
There is, I conceive, no other mode of solving this problem
than by regarding these opposite results in the light of vestiges,
belonging to an early stage of society, of the same
variableness and inequality in the efforts of the human mind,
which are observable in the inventions of modern times!
That this question admits of no other solution will be manifest
from Chapter VI, in which it is shown that the Chinese
is not fundamentally different from the tongues of Europe
and Western Asia, but the <emph>same language in a different stage
of its growth</emph>!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>6. The Astronomical Theory of Bailly.</head>

<p>
Bailly's theory is that the various nations of the ancient
world were descendants of emigrants from a primæval community
superior to them in knowledge and civilization, of
which he places the locality in Central Asia. His views are
founded on the fact that there existed a knowledge of the results
of some of the most recondite Scientific principles
among the Persians, Chaldeans, &amp;c., (nations who were certainly
unacquainted with the principles themselves,) as, for
example, of the moon's course, of the Solar year, of the
Zodiac, of the Planets, of the retrogression of the fixed Stars
&amp;c. Some of Bailly's opinions have been impugned in
Cuvier's Theory of the Earth.
</p>

</div>

<div>

<p>
The question whether the different branches of the Human
Race are descended from one Stock, has been discussed on
<pb n='xxvii'/><anchor id='Pgxxvii'/>
Physiological grounds by Dr. Prichard,<note place='foot'>Prichard on Man.</note> in a work equally
remarkable for profound Philosophical and extensive Literary
research. After detailing a variety of facts with respect to
the distribution of Plants and Animals, he thus expresses his
conclusion: <q>The inference to be collected from the facts at
present known, seems to be as follows. The various tribes
of organized beings, were originally placed by the Creator in
certain regions, for which they are by their nature peculiarly
adapted. Each species had only one beginning in a
single stock; probably a single pair, as Linnæus supposed,
was first called into being in a particular spot, and their
progeny left to disperse themselves to as great a distance
as the locomotive powers, bestowed on each species, or its
capability of bearing changes of climate and other physical
circumstances may have enabled it to wander.</q>
</p>

<p>
According to this writer the varieties of colour, feature,
&amp;c. displayed by different races of Men, are the results partly
of climate and other external agencies, and partly also of a
natural tendency to the manifestation of varieties which may
be viewed in the light of a characteristic quality of the
Species. Of these propositions the numerous and diversified
facts collected by Dr. Prichard appear to furnish perfectly
conclusive evidence. Thus he has shown that the characteristic
physiognomy of the Negro is found to occur and disappear
by nice gradations in strict accordance with the differences
of climate throughout the African Continent.
</p>

<p>
The tendency to variety is very manifest, even from facts
under our daily observation. Individuals are common among
European nations, who exhibit some one or more of the traits
of the Negro, as, for example, his woolly hair, thick lips, &amp;c.
Among the Negro races have been born individuals of a
perfectly white colour. Many of these specimens, according
<pb n='xxviii'/><anchor id='Pgxxviii'/>
to Dr. Prichard, were not Albinos or diseased persons, but
indisputable examples of his principle.
</p>

<p>
It is probable that in the infancy of the race, this extraordinary
tendency may have served the important purpose
of accelerating those physiological changes by which the
constitution of Man was adapted to the different climates of
the Globe, while, in subsequent ages, climate which determines
the physiology of the majority, may be said thereby to
neutralize the influence of these exceptions. Diversities of
complexion, &amp;c. occur in our own and in neighbouring
countries within a very limited area. Thus the dark hair
and features of the ancient Silures which were ascribed by
the Romans to a Spanish origin, are still observable among
their posterity, characteristics of which, I conceive, a satisfactory
explanation may be found in the warm and equable
temperature of the Southern counties of Wales, caused by
the peculiar distribution of land and water.<note place='foot'>Lyell on Geology.</note> In these
countries many productions, both animal and vegetable,
flourish, which are rarely found further North. The Nightingale
is common, and the Vine is cultivated frequently.
The contrast between the temperature of the coasts of South
Wales and that of North Wales has not escaped the attention
of the Welsh Bards. Davyth ap Gwilym, a Bard of the
fourteenth Century, in a Poem of great beauty, in which he
describes himself as writing from the land of <q>wild,</q>
Gwynedh (North Wales), calls upon the Summer and the
Sun to visit with their choicest blessings the genial region of
<q>Morganwg,</q> (Glamorganshire,) of which he was a native,
and alludes to its warm climate and its Vineyards, which
seem to have been a conspicuous feature! For some very
valuable illustrations of the same principle, I may refer to the
account given by the Rev. Thomas Price in his Tour in
<pb n='xxix'/><anchor id='Pgxxix'/>
Brittany, published in the Cambrian Quarterly Magazine,
of the varieties of complexion and stature observable in
Upper and Lower Brittany.<note place='foot'>See also the Rev. T. Price on the Physiology and Physiognomy of the British
Isles.</note>
</p>

<p>
From the facts collected by Dr. Prichard, it appears to
follow very distinctly, not only that Human Physiology is
extremely mutable, but also that the transitions do not occupy
a very long interval of time. Thus Jews are resident
in the African Kingdom of Kongo, whose complexions are
as black as those of the native Negro population. Again on
the borders of Negro-land, different sections of the same
tribe, speaking the same language, are, in many instances,
found variously approaching to or diverging from the Negro
standard of colour and physiognomy, according to the latitude
or elevation, or other physical features of their respective
locations; instances in which the separation&mdash;and therefore
the physiological differences&mdash;must have been recent&mdash;for languages
change too rapidly to preserve the features of identity
or even of a close affinity for a period of long duration! The
descendants of the Arabs who overran the North of Africa
in comparatively modern times furnish another example; they
do not differ in physiognomy from the Berbers, the original
inhabitants of the same regions.
</p>

<p>
From these and similar facts it must be inferred&mdash;not only
that the existing varieties of Human Physiology form no
objection to the opinion that the different populations of the
Globe are descended from one stock&mdash;the same facts lead also
to the conclusion, that&mdash;with relation to the earliest eras in
the History of our species&mdash;Physiological peculiarities must
be entirely rejected as evidence, either of a specific connexion
or of a specific difference between individual races of men, a
principle admitting of many highly interesting applications,
of which an example will now be offered.
</p>

<pb n='xxx'/><anchor id='Pgxxx'/>

<p>
By what road did the first Colonists of Europe reach their
final destination? Adelung has inferred that Europe was
peopled exclusively from the Steppes of Northern Asia.
But for this opinion, it does not seem that any valid reason
can be assigned. If we assume Central Asia to have been
the focus of migration, it will be observed that there are
three routes by which the forefathers of the European
nations may have arrived in their final abodes, viz. 1, The
Steppes of Northern Asia; 2, Asia Minor and the Hellespont;
and 3, The Isthmus of Suez, the North of Africa, and the
Straits of Gibraltar. For concluding that either of these
three routes was used, to the exclusion of the other two, it
would not be easy to point out any strong argument based on
Geographical grounds. Now if the third was employed at all
it may be inferred that some of the European nations may be
even more nearly allied to those of Africa than they are to
the Asiatic populations. To this conclusion, however, a formidable
objection occurs in the strikingly contrasted Physiology
of Africa and Europe, for&mdash;even though it should be
conceded that these opposite features do not serve to prove
an aboriginal difference of race&mdash;the question still arises
whether they do not, nevertheless, furnish evidence that the
nations of these two continents are more remotely related
than any other branches of the Human Family; whether they
do not point to the inference that the inhabitants of the South
and West of Asia&mdash;who certainly occupy an intermediate place
Physiologically&mdash;must not also be regarded as forming a connecting
link between those of Europe and Africa in a Genealogical
and Historical sense? To these inquiries it will be
obvious that the facts just adverted to furnish a very distinct
answer, for from those facts it directly follows&mdash;not only that
climate and other existing causes are sufficient to account for
the different Physical peculiarities of the inhabitants of Africa
and Europe&mdash;but it also follows from the same evidence, that a
<pb n='xxxi'/><anchor id='Pgxxxi'/>
period of time far short of that during which the European
and African nations are known to have occupied their present
abodes, would have sufficed to superinduce the opposite characteristics
they now display! Perhaps it may be inferred,
though probably the subject does not admit of a precise conclusion
on this head, that in a suitable climate the lapse of
500 or 600 years might be more than adequate to engraft on
the physiognomy of Southern Asia all the distinctive peculiarities
of the Negro. That these peculiarities had been fully
developed in an early era of the History of the World, is
manifest from the Egyptian Paintings, in many of which we
have individuals of this ill-fated race very vividly depicted,
appearing sometimes as tributaries, and on other occasions as
captives, leashed together like hounds!
</p>

<p>
Infirm health, and final extirpation, have often attended
colonies from the North of Europe settled in tropical climes,
incidents that seem to have had great weight with Dr.
Prichard himself, as constituting an objection to his views.
To this objection, however&mdash;independent of the numerous
facts of an opposite nature&mdash;the following consideration, I
conceive, suggests a satisfactory answer. Nature may have
provided for gradual transitions of climate such as must have
been encountered by a population progressively diffused over
the Globe; and that she has done so appears to be distinctly
established. But it does not follow that she has made any
provision for abrupt changes. These are probably a violation
of her dictates, and may have the same tendency to produce
disease and death as we know to be incident to sudden
and extensive variations of temperature in the same climate
and country.
</p>

<p>
The foregoing deductions will be found to have a highly interesting
application in relation to the origin of two ancient
European races, the Basques and the Celts. If Physiological
grounds are dismissed from our consideration, it will probably
<pb n='xxxii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxii'/>
be found that the balance of evidence is in favour of the conclusion
that these races have sprung, not from Asiatic colonists,
but from emigrants from the coasts of the continent of
Africa!
</p>

<p>
This conclusion is strongly favoured by the geographical
position in which we find these races placed at the dawn of
History. In the earliest ages the Celts and Basques were in
possession of all the most western countries of Europe. The
Spanish Peninsula, the South of France, and the North of
Italy, were divided between them; the remainder of France,
the whole of Belgium, Switzerland, and the British Isles,
were held by the Celts, while of Sicily and Italy the Basques
appear to have been the first inhabitants. (See Dr. Prichard's
Works.) Now in connexion with these facts two considerations
deserve to be noticed, which, by a reference to the map
will be seen to acquire especial force. 1. It will be observed
that the original regions of the Celts and Basques are more
closely contiguous to Africa than the Eastern countries of
Europe are; both Spain, and Sicily (which may be considered
a part of Italy,) approaching at certain points very closely to
the African coast. 2. If we assume Central Asia to have
been the original focus of migration&mdash;it will be evident&mdash;that
nomade septs issuing thence through the Syro-Phœnician
countries, and along the North of Africa&mdash;would have
found a shorter route to the Italian and to the Spanish
Peninsulas&mdash;than those emigrants who may be supposed to
have passed over the Hellespont, or through Northern Asia!
Further it may be added, that the regions originally held by
the Basques and Celts are precisely those which would have
been occupied by the descendants of Colonists who had arrived
in Europe from the South-west of Africa if opposed&mdash;as
we may infer them to have been&mdash;by rival Septs impeding
their progress towards the East. To the East of the Basque
and Celtic regions we find the rest of Europe possessed by
<pb n='xxxiii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxiii'/>
the Teutons or Germans, the Finns, the Sclavonians, and the
Greeks, nations all located in countries closely contiguous to
Asia, to the inhabitants of which continent the evidence of
language indisputably proves them all to have been closely
related.<note place='foot'>The Greek, Russian, and German, have all been shown to belong to what
are called the Indo-European class of languages. The Finnish, Vater states to
be in its roots identical with the German.</note> That these nations were also the primitive inhabitants
of the territories which they still occupy has been
pointed out by Dr. Prichard.
</p>

<p>
The conclusion above suggested appears to be supported
by the evidence of history. With respect to the Basques, or
Iberians, Dr. Prichard has referred to the testimony of classical
authorities, which distinctly confirms the opinion that
they were an African race. But with regard to the Celts,
the same learned writer assumes that they must originally
have come from the East. It is remarkable, however, that
this conclusion is directly at variance with the current
opinions of the Ancients, to which he has referred in the following
passage:
</p>

<p>
<q>The earlier history of the Celtic people is a subject of
great interest, but of difficult investigation. Were they
the aborigines of Gaul or Germany? According to all the
testimony of history, or rather of ancient tradition collected
by the writers of the Roman Empire, the <emph>migrations
of the Gauls were</emph> always <emph>from West to East</emph>; the Celtic
nations in <emph>Germany as well as in Italy</emph> and in <emph>the East</emph>,
were supposed to have been colonies <emph>from Gaul</emph>, and the
Celtæ have been considered as the immemorial inhabitants
of <emph>Western Europe</emph>!</q> (Ethnography of the Celtic Race, in
Prichard on Man.)
</p>

<p>
In assuming that the Celts migrated to Europe direct
from Asia, Dr. Prichard's views were very naturally influenced
by the valuable evidence he has himself adduced of
<pb n='xxxiv'/><anchor id='Pgxxxiv'/>
the connexion of the Celtic dialects with the Sanscrit, &amp;c.
This evidence, however, has been shown (see p. <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>) to be
quite consistent with the conclusion suggested above, viz. that
the Celts may have sprung from emigrants who penetrated
into Spain from the opposite coast of Africa.
</p>

<p>
The interesting researches of Humboldt, which have served
by the evidence of local names to show that the language of
the ancient Iberians was the same as the Basque, have also
established, by means of the same evidence, that the Peninsula
of Spain, at the time of its subjugation by the Romans, was
divided in a very irregular manner between Basque and
Celtic tribes. <q>The Celts,</q> observes Dr. Prichard, <q>possessed
a considerable part of Spain, comprehending not
only the central provinces, but also extensive territories in
both of the western corners of the Peninsula, where a
population either wholly or partly of Celtic descent remained
at the period of the Roman Conquest.</q> The
remainder of Spain was held by Basques or by Celt-Iberian
tribes, a mixture of both races.
</p>

<p>
This singular intermingling of the Basques and Celts in
the Spanish Peninsula has been a source of many conflicting
opinions among the learned, on the question which of these
two races were the first inhabitants, and which were the invaders
of Spain? The enigma, I conceive, will be most
satisfactorily solved by the rejection of the opinion that that
country was in the first instance wholly occupied by either!
Both may have arrived almost simultaneously, too weak in
numbers wholly to engross the new territory on which they
thus entered. Each may have thrown out into the most
distant provinces weak colonies, consisting of a few nomade
families, which afterwards became the foci of powerful Septs.
This explanation completely harmonises with the instructive
facts which have been developed relative to the North American
Indian Tribes, who are still in the <q>hunter state,</q> as
<pb n='xxxv'/><anchor id='Pgxxxv'/>
the first colonists of Europe must have been. The languages
of a great portion of the North American Indian Tribes have
been shown to consist of mere dialects of a few Parent
Tongues. But the Septs thus proved to be nearly related
are not always contiguous, but often separated by tribes
speaking dialects of a different class, a necessary consequence
of the roving habits and the imperfect occupation of territory
incident to the <q>hunter state.</q> An interesting example of the
influence of the causes which lead to these results occurs in
Mr. Catlin's allusion to a North American Indian Tribe, the
Assinneboins, of whom he says: <q rend='pre'>The Assinneboins are a
part of the Dahcotas, or Sioux, undoubtedly; for their
personal appearance, as well as their language, is very
similar.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>At what time, or in what manner, these two parts of a
nation got strayed away from each other is a mystery; yet
such cases have often occurred, of which I shall say more
in future. Large parties who are straying off in pursuit
of game, or in the occupation of war, are oftentimes intercepted
by their enemy, and being prevented from returning,
are run off to a distant region, where they take up their
residence and establish themselves as a nation.</q> (Catlin
on the North American Indians, p. 53.)
</p>

<p>
The evidence furnished by their languages is not unfavorable
to the supposition that the Basques and Celts may
have been of African origin.
</p>

<p>
Though by Humboldt, and some other eminent writers, the
Basque has been regarded as distinct from other languages,
the examples which occur at the close of this Introduction
must, I conceive, serve to remove all doubt as to the identity
of the Basques or Iberians with the other branches of the
Human Race. Of these examples grammatical differences
cannot serve to diminish the force. (See p. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> and the chapter
on the Chinese Language.) The Basque also shows some
<pb n='xxxvi'/><anchor id='Pgxxxvi'/>
traces of a peculiar connexion with the African tongues.
Thus its numerals are nearly identical with those of the
North African nations, and the formative particle Er is used
for similar purposes in the Basque and Egyptian, and in both
is placed before the word, a characteristic which distinguishes
the African from the European languages. (See p. <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>.) Thus
we have Juan, <q>To go,</q> Er-uan, <q>To cause to go,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Basque.</hi>)
Ouini, <q>Light,</q> Er-ouini, <q>To cause Light,</q> or <q>To enlighten,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Egyptian.</hi>) Instances of words formed in the same manner,
which are common to the Egyptian and the Celtic, will be
found at p. <ref target='PgApA038'>38</ref>, Appendix A.
</p>

<p>
A striking example of the connexion of the Celtic languages
with those of Africa occurs in the region where the
respective Physiological peculiarities of North Africa and
Negro-land meet. In the vicinity of the river Senegal the
line of separation may be said to divide the Iolofs, a Negro
nation, from the Fulahs and Phellatahs, whose physical
characteristics are of an intermediate nature. Now it is remarkable,
that by comparing and as it were uniting the
dialects of the Iolofs, the Fulahs, and the Phellatahs, some of
the most common Welsh words are obtained essentially unchanged,
as in Le oure, <q>The Moon,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Fulahs</hi>,) Gour, and
Gourgne, <q>A Man,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Iolofs</hi>,) Gourko, <q>A Man,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Phellatahs</hi>,)
Loho, <q>The Hand,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Iolofs</hi>,) Bourou, <q>Bread,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Iolofs</hi>,)
Bouron, <q>Bread,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Fulahs</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
Consistently with the principles on which the origin of
languages is hereafter explained in this work, I cannot
suggest that these coincidences, striking as they are, afford
any proof of a specific connexion between the Celtic and
African races. But they tend to prove, nevertheless, that
language furnishes no positive ground for inferring that the
Celts are more nearly allied to the Asiatic than they are to
the African races. Hence, since the evidence of Physiology
on this subject is also of a negative character, it may be
<pb n='xxxvii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxvii'/>
affirmed, with regard both to this race and the Basques,
that the opinion that they are of Asiatic descent&mdash;opposed
as it is by the evidence of history in one, if not in both
cases&mdash;and by the inferences which Geographical considerations,
in both instances, appear to suggest&mdash;requires reconsideration.
</p>

<p>
In this place I may observe, that in the course of the following
inquiries it will be found true as a general principle,
that in direct proportion as the proofs of the General Unity
of the different races of the Globe are observed to become
more distinct, the evidence which has frequently been relied
upon as demonstrative of a specific connexion between particular
races will also be observed to become more doubtful,
for both the affinities and differences which exist between the
languages of contiguous&mdash;and those of the most distant&mdash;nations,
are for the most part so nearly alike in character,
and so nearly equal in degree, as to favour the inference that
the dispersion of the Human Race must have been exceedingly
rapid, and that many ancient nations, such as the
Basques and Celts, who in subsequent times were found
closely contiguous, must, in the first eras of the world, have
been isolated from each other by incessant war and nomade
habits, almost as early as the most distant nations were! It is
certain that the language of the Welsh does not present either to
the Basque or to the Teutonic&mdash;dialects of nations located contiguously
to their Celtic forefathers&mdash;examples of affinity more
striking than those just adverted to. Nor are the examples
above noticed of the connexion between the Welsh and the
African dialects by any means more remarkable than the instances
of resemblance between the former tongue and the
dialect of the Mandans, a North American Indian Tribe,
which have been pointed out by Mr. Catlin! In both cases
the same observation applies&mdash;an observation based on a principle
that will be more fully understood hereafter&mdash;viz., that
<pb n='xxxviii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxviii'/>
these coincidences are unequivocal proofs of a generic, but
not of that kind of specific relation, which implies that these
nations were at one time united more intimately than the
other families of mankind.
</p>

<p>
Various miscellaneous considerations connected with the
primitive migrations of mankind may now he adverted to.
</p>

<p>
Neither the extent nor the physical features of our Globe
are such as imply that the spread of population over its surface
must necessarily have been the work of many ages. To
traverse the habitable earth from the Southern extremity of
Africa to the North of Asia, and thence to the extreme
Southern point of the American continent, is a task which
would require only a small fraction of one man's life! And
in the first ages of the Race, Man was probably a Nomade,
a Wanderer! It may be inferred, therefore, that in the early
ages of the world the diffusion of population was very rapid
in the warmer latitudes, while towards the North it was obstructed
rather by climate than by any other cause. As
population became more dense in the more favoured regions,
weaker tribes, it may be surmised, were gradually driven
into the steppes of Asia and the wilds of Siberia, whence
they may be supposed to have penetrated into Europe on
the one hand, and across Behring's Straits into America on
the other. With the exception of America, all the great
Continents are connected together by districts easily traversed
by Man; and Behring's Strait, which is interposed between
America and the North-east of Asia, might be passed in the
canoes of some of the most barbarous tribes with which we
are acquainted.
</p>

<p>
The peopling of Islands is a subject that has been discussed
very satisfactorily by Dr. Prichard, and after him by
Mr. Lyell. Their conclusion is, that the occasional drifting
of canoes by storms and currents, is sufficient to account for
the existence of Human population in the most remote
<pb n='xxxix'/><anchor id='Pgxxxix'/>
islands, as is proved by facts related by Kotzebue and others.
Several reasons have however been suggested in the following
pages, for the conclusion that Australia is a recently peopled
country.
</p>

<p>
The geographical distribution of the various languages of
the globe seems to render Adelung's arguments for regarding
Central Asia as the birth-place of our species eminently convincing.
The languages of China and the South-east of
Asia are either Monosyllabic, or Tongues that partake of
that character; Languages having the same features are
spoken through the long chain of islands in the Pacific as far
as New Zealand. All the other Tongues of the Globe are
Polysyllabic. Now if the birth-place of Man and the focus
of migration was in Central Asia, on the borders of Cashmire
and Tibet, this division of Languages would necessarily have
followed, for it will be observed that Tibet, which is the
source of the rivers of the regions to the South-east, would
in that case have given inhabitants to the countries of South-eastern
Asia, countries which are isolated from all others, for
not only are they cut off from Europe, Africa, and Western
Asia, by the system of Table-lands and its Mountains, they
are also separated from Northern Asia and therefore from
America by the Great Desert of Gobi or Shamo. To the
Steppes of Northern Asia, and consequently to America as
well as to Europe and Africa, the territory of Persia or Iran,
which, as has been seen, forms the opposite slope of the
system of Table-lands, is the natural route.
</p>

<p>
The relations which the Parsian, the Pehlwi, and the Zend,
the ancient dialects of Persia, bear to those of the surrounding
countries, seem to be in a highly interesting manner
confirmatory of Adelung's views. The Parsian, which was
spoken in the South of Persia in the provinces near to India,
approaches so closely to the Sanscrit, the ancient language
of that country, that Sir William Jones considered the Parsian
<pb n='xl'/><anchor id='Pgxl'/>
to have been the parent of the Sanscrit. The Pehlwi, the
language of the Parthians who occupied the centre of Persia,
a territory that adjoins the Semetic countries, appears very
decidedly to be a connecting link between the Semetic languages
on the one hand and the Parsian and Zend and the
Indo-European tongues, viewed as a class, on the other. The
Zend, the dialect of ancient Media, or North Persia, is supposed
to be closely allied to the Armenian. The Parsian, Pehlwi,
and Zend, respectively bearing these relations to the languages
of the neighbouring countries, are closely connected as sister
dialects among themselves. These facts tend to show&mdash;from
the summit of the Western Table-land viewed as a centre,
through Persia viewed as a medium&mdash;a radiation of language
from which a radiation of population may reasonably be
presumed.
</p>

<p>
The species of affinity which the ancient Persian dialects
display to the languages of the adjoining countries appears
to point very distinctly to another highly important conclusion
in relation to the early history of mankind, viz., that the
diffusion of population over Persia and the contiguous
countries must have been a comparatively recent event with
reference to the earliest specimens of the Persian and Semetic
dialects, &amp;c. After the lapse of a long interval the languages
even of contiguous countries lose the traces of original unity.
But with regard to modern dialects it can be distinctly shown
that those of intermediate districts are connecting links
between those of the extremities. Thus the Savoyard connects
the French and Italian dialects of the Latin, and those
of the North of England are intermediate between the modern
English and the Lowland Scotch; Du Ponceau has made a
similar remark with regard to the North American Indian
dialects spoken by kindred tribes. Septs placed in the centre
continue to maintain a certain degree of intercourse with all
the tribes by which they are surrounded, a consideration
<pb n='xli'/><anchor id='Pgxli'/>
which will account for these results, which probably cannot,
in many cases, be referred to different degrees of Genealogical
affinity.
</p>

<p>
One of the most striking indications of the Original Unity
of the different Races of Men is derivable from the uniformity
of the Moral, Mental, and Social Features they display.
</p>

<p>
Though the mind in early infancy may be destitute of
positive ideas, it seems to be evident, nevertheless, that our
Species has been gifted with Intellectual Faculties, and with
Moral Sentiments and Sympathies, which are in the strictest
sense innate.<note place='foot'>See Dugald Stewart, on the Active and Moral Faculties.</note> Of this conclusion a striking confirmation is
derivable, from the extraordinary sameness which, on a close
examination, will be found to prevail in the characters, sentiments,
and sympathies of the various branches of the Human
Species. Of this truth a few examples will now be noticed.
</p>

<p>
The Negro tribes of Africa have frequently been supposed to
belong to an inferior race of Men, an opinion founded&mdash;partly
on an inadequate conception of the progressive character of
the Human species&mdash;partly on ignorance of the progress which
many Negro nations have actually made. On the one hand
it would be difficult to show that the rudest of the African
tribes are in a more barbarous condition than the ancestors of
some of the most civilized European nations once were! On
the other hand, the proofs of a capacity for social improvement
are as unequivocal in the former case as they are in the
latter! Large and important nations, as for example the
Mandingoes and the Iolofs, are found in the interior of Africa,
professing the Mahomedan religion, and as far advanced in
the virtues and refinements of civilization, as any other
nations who are followers of the same creed. In many of these
nations the Men are distinguished by a grave and reflective
character, and the women are remarkable for their exemplary
<pb n='xlii'/><anchor id='Pgxlii'/>
discharge of the duties of domestic life. Sections of the Negro
race have also been converted to Christianity, including many
individuals who have been distinguished not only by a steady
conformity to its precepts, but by the zeal and success with
which they have fulfilled the high duties of Missionaries
among their countrymen, and by the composition of Theological
treatises of no inconsiderable merit! (See Dr.
Prichard on Man.)
</p>

<p>
It has been already observed that the physiognomy of the
Egyptians approaches closely to that of the Negro race, of
which it may be regarded as a modification. It has also been
pointed out in another part of this work, that the evidence of
language favours the inference that Egypt was the source of
the various African populations. The discoveries of our age&mdash;while
they have rendered indisputable the extraordinary arts,
high civilization, and vast political power of ancient Egypt&mdash;have
also served to disclose, in the portraits of individuals of
that country, forms of grace and elegance, that serve to link
together by the ties of a close and pathetic association, the infancy
with the later ages of the world! To adopt the expression
of Schlegel, (See Schlegel's Translation of Dr. Prichard's
Work on Eg. Mythol.,) the physiognomy of the ancient
Egyptians is that of a <q>very noble race</q> of men. But it
differs very widely from the characteristics of the European
nations; in the dignified features of the men, and also in the
lineaments of female beauty, the approach to the Negro Physiognomy
is often very conspicuous!
</p>

<p>
I may instance the countenance of the Sphynx as affording
a specimen of the species of approximation to the Negro
Physiognomy which is observable in ancient Egyptian
remains!
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
One of the most forcible examples of the susceptibility to
<pb n='xliii'/><anchor id='Pgxliii'/>
civilization<note place='foot'>In connexion with this subject I may refer to an article distinguished by great
genius and profound philosophical reasoning, which lately appeared in Chambers's
Journal, under the title of <q>Thoughts on Nations and Civilization.</q> (See
Number for May 21st, 1842.)</note> of nations once very barbarous may be found in
a comparison of the character of the ancient Gauls and
modern French. When Hannibal invaded Italy he confined
his ravages to the possessions of the Romans and spared
those of the Gauls; a partial distinction which won the
favour of this simple people, who flocked in great numbers
to his standard. The Gauls who were in his army at the
battle of Cannæ are described as a fierce people, naked from
the waist, carrying large round shields, with swords of an
enormous size blunted at the point. Yet there cannot be a
doubt that the French, one of the most refined and distinguished
of modern nations, are lineally descended from this
primitive race! (See p. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>.) The true answer to the reveries
of Pinkerton, with respect to the imputed incapacity of the
Celts, is to be found in the literature and science of the
French, in whom, owing to the great extent of their country,
the original Celtic blood is most probably less unmingled
than it is in the Irish, the Welsh, or the Highland Scotch!
</p>

<p>
A comparison of the character of the ancient Gauls and
modern French involves also an instructive example of the
mode in which the tendency to progression in the Human
species is often united with a stability of national character
in some features that forms a singular contrast to that
tendency. In comparing Cæsar's Commentaries on his Wars
in Gaul with the volumes of General Napier, we are struck,
in almost every page, with proofs of a coincidence of mental
features so minute, that but for the opposite accompaniments
on the one hand, of a primitive, and on the other of a modern
age, we might imagine we had before us, in these relations,
two narratives referring to the same wars, the same sieges,
<pb n='xliv'/><anchor id='Pgxliv'/>
and the same men! The mind is perplexed to conceive how
a nation that has existed in conditions so contrasted, as regards
Civilization, could have continued thus uniform in its
social and moral features!
</p>

<p>
Striking as these and other proofs which may be adduced
of the uniformity of character which has often been maintained
by the same nation in different stages of society undoubtedly
are, they must cease to excite surprise&mdash;though they may be
said to acquire even a higher interest&mdash;when viewed through
the medium of the closely analogous results which will be
found to flow from a comparison with the civilized nations
of Europe of contemporaneous Tribes still existing in the
<q>Hunter State.</q>
</p>

<p>
The natives of Australia have generally been thought to occupy
the lowest place in the social scale. But from Col. Grey's
valuable work it may be inferred that in their devices for
catching game and other arts belonging to their rude state,
they give proofs of the same intelligence and acuteness as are
evinced by other races of men. They have also Songs of War
and Love which they sing in tunes most barbarous and discordant.
The more refined lays of the European excite mimicry
and laughter. But, adds Col. Grey, <q>Some of the natives
are not insensible to the charms of our music. Warrup,
a native youth, who lived with me for several months
as a servant, once accompanied me to an amateur theatre at
Perth, and when the actors came forward and sang <q>God
save the Queen,</q> <emph>he burst into tears</emph>. He <emph>certainly could
not have comprehended the words of the song, and, therefore,
must have been affected by the Music alone</emph>.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<q>Nothing can awaken in the breast more melancholy feelings
than the funeral chants of these people. They are
sung by a whole chorus of females of all ages, and the effect
<pb n='xlv'/><anchor id='Pgxlv'/>
produced upon the bystanders by this wild music is indescribable.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Many of the Australian words given by Colonel Grey will
readily be recognized among the terms collected from the
languages of the other Four Continents in <ref target='Appendix_A'>Appendix A</ref>; as
for example: Nganga, Ngon-ge, Tin-dee, Tiendee, <q>The Sun</q>
and <q>The Stars.</q> (See App. A, p. <ref target='PgApA026'>26</ref>.) Yanna, <q>To go,</q> and
Tjênna, Tinna, <q>The Foot.</q> (<ref target='PgApA074'>74</ref>.) Tullun, Tdallung, Tadlanga,
<q>The Tongue.</q> (<ref target='PgApA072'>72</ref>.) Nago, <q>To see.</q> (<ref target='PgApA042'>42</ref>, <ref target='PgApA043'>43</ref>.) Mena,
<q>The Eye.</q> (<ref target='PgApA014'>14</ref>.) Poou, Puiyu, Poito, Booyoo, <q>Smoke,</q> and
Bobun, <q>To blow.</q> (<ref target='PgApA021'>21</ref>.)
</p>

<p>
In the construction of their canoes, the inhabitants of
some of the most barbarous islands of the Pacific, exhibit an
originality and a variety of conception of precisely the same
nature as is displayed in those mechanical inventions by which
the sum of European civilization is progressively extended!
</p>

<p>
But in relation to the subject more immediately under
examination, far the most valuable and instructive information
occurs in Mr. Catlin's account of his residence among
the North American Indian Tribes, a work, admirable alike
as a living picture of Indian manners and sentiments, and
also as an earnest and simple minded, and for that reason an
eminently touching and eloquent appeal, on behalf of one of
the noblest, though one of the most unfortunate families of
the Human Race!
</p>

<p>
<q>I have roamed about from time to time during seven
or eight years,</q> says the writer, <q rend='pre'>visiting and associating
with some three or four hundred thousand of these people,
under an almost infinite variety of circumstances; and
from the very many and decidedly voluntary acts of their
hospitality and kindness, I feel bound to pronounce them,
by nature, a kind and hospitable people. I have been
welcomed generally in their country, and treated to the
<pb n='xlvi'/><anchor id='Pgxlvi'/>
best that they could give me, without any charges made
for my board; they have often escorted me through their
enemies' country at some hazard to their own lives, and
aided me in passing mountains and rivers with my awkward
baggage; and under all these circumstances of exposure,
no Indian ever betrayed me, struck me a blow, or stole
from me a shilling's worth of my property that I am aware of.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This is saying a great deal (and proving it too, if the
reader will believe me,) in favour of the virtues of these
people; when it is borne in mind, as it should be, that
there is no law in the land to punish for theft, that locks
and keys are not known in their country, that the commandments
have never been divulged amongst them, nor
can any human retribution fall upon the head of a thief,
save the disgrace which attaches as a stigma to his character
in the eyes of the people around him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And thus in these little communities, strange as it may
seem, in the absence of all systems of jurisprudence, I have
often beheld peace and happiness, and quiet, reigning supreme,
for which even kings and emperors might envy them.
I have seen rights and virtue protected, and wrongs redressed;
and I have seen conjugal, filial and paternal affection,
in the simplicity and contentedness of nature. I have
unavoidably formed warm and enduring attachments to
some of these men, which I do not wish to forget, who have
brought me near to their hearts, and in our final separation
have embraced me in their arms, and commended me and
my affairs to the keeping of the Great Spirit.</q>
</p>

<p>
Among those tribes which have been placed in contact with
the Whites, individuals, generally Chiefs, have acquired all
the advantages of a European education, to which in most of
these instances are united, dignified and gentlemanlike feelings
and manners, qualities which seem to belong to the native
American character. Some tribes have been nearly extipated
<pb n='xlvii'/><anchor id='Pgxlvii'/>
by the use of fermented liquors. But some sections of
the Indian population have been converted to Christianity, and
adopted the habit of total abstinence; others have become industrious
cultivators of the soil. Where this race has rejected
the benefits of civilization, it seems almost invariably to have
arisen from the prejudices naturally excited in their minds by
the vices of the worst part of the white population, and the
calamities which they have caused by the introduction of
ardent spirits! Even those excellent men who have devoted
their lives to the religious instruction of the Indians, and by
whose efforts it may be inferred that some Tribes have been
saved from extinction, have too often found in these prejudices,
an obstacle which might perhaps be removed were
the missionaries generally to commence by offering to teach
some of the simplest arts of civilized life&mdash;information of
which the benefits would be immediately appreciated&mdash;as a
means of paving the way for obtaining that confidence which,
as religious instructors, they require.
</p>

<p>
The life of constant war and peril to which the Indians are
exposed is incompatible with <emph>actual</emph> Social advancement.
But proofs of a spontaneous <emph>tendency</emph> to civilization may
be gleaned, as I conceive, from the grace and tastefulness of
their dresses&mdash;the beautiful lodges many of the Tribes build&mdash;and
other indications, &amp;c. But of this truth, a still more decisive
example occurs, as I venture to think, in the account given
by Mr. Catlin of a very interesting tribe, the Mandans, whom,
from the evidence of language already noticed and other considerations,
he has conjectured to be descendants of Madoc's
Colony, and whose personal character and appearance he
thus describes:
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The Mandans are certainly a very interesting and pleasing
people in their personal appearance and manners; differing
in many respects, both in <emph>looks</emph> and customs, from all other
<emph>tribes which I have ever seen</emph>. They are not a warlike
<pb n='xlviii'/><anchor id='Pgxlviii'/>
people, for they seldom, if ever, carry war into their
enemies' country; but when invaded, show their valour and
courage to be equal to that of any people on earth. Being
a small tribe, and unable to contend on the wide prairies
with the Sioux and other roaming tribes, who are ten times
more numerous, they have very judiciously <emph>located themselves
in a permanent village, which is strongly</emph> fortified, and ensures
their preservation. By this means they have <emph>advanced
further in the arts of manufacture, and have supplied their
lodges more abundantly with the comforts and even luxuries
of life than any Indian nation I know of. The consequence
of this is that the tribe have taken many steps ahead of other
tribes in manners and refinements</emph> (if I may be allowed to use
the word refinement to Indian life); and are, therefore,
familiarly (and correctly) denominated by the Traders and
others, who have been amongst them, the <q>polite and
friendly Mandans.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>There is certainly great justice in the remark, and so
forcibly have I been struck with the peculiar <emph>ease and elegance</emph>
of this people, together with the <emph>diversity of complexions</emph>,
the various colours of their hair and eyes, the
singularity of their language, and their peculiar and unaccountable
customs, that I am fully convinced that they have
sprung from some other origin than that of the other North
American tribes, or that they are an amalgam of natives
with some civilized race.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Here arises a question of very great interest and importance
for discussion; and after further familiarity with their
character, customs, and traditions, if I forget not, I will
eventually give it further consideration. Suffice it then for
the present, that their <emph>personal appearance</emph> alone, independent
of their modes and customs, pronounces them at
once as more or less than savage.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>A stranger in the Mandan village is first struck with the
<pb n='xlix'/><anchor id='Pgxlix'/>
<emph>different shades of complexion</emph> and colours of hair which he
sees in a crowd, and is at once almost disposed to exclaim
that <q><emph>these are not Indians!</emph></q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There are a great many of these people whose complexions
appear as <emph>light as half-breeds</emph>; and amongst the
women particularly, there are many whose <emph>skins are almost
white, with the most pleasing symmetry and proportion of
features; with hazel, with gray, and with blue eyes; with
mildness and sweetness of expression, and excessive modesty
of demeanour, which render them exceedingly pleasing and
beautiful</emph>!</q>
</p>

<p>
It has been shown in another part of this work that the
language of the Mandans does not prove them to be connected
with the Welsh, and that their dialect is of the same
character as that of other Indian tribes. Further, did space
allow, I might produce some evidence that the Mandans are
allied in blood to their hereditary foes, the fierce and warlike
Sioux! The phenomena noticed by Mr. Catlin must be explained
therefore by the aid of different principles than those
to which he has referred.<note place='foot'>This sept were also generally termed the <q>gentlemanly</q> Mandans. The
recent destruction of this warm-hearted tribe by the smallpox is one of the most
heart-rending tragedies in history!</note>
</p>

<p>
I conceive then that these various peculiarities of colour,
personal appearance, and of manners and social habits, which
he noticed amongst the Mandans, may all be viewed as effects
of one simple cause, viz. their <q>judiciously selected location</q>
in <q>a permanent village,</q> involving protection from exposure
to the seasons on the one hand, and the abandonment of
nomade habits on the other. To the former, the changes of
complexion&mdash;to the latter, the social advances&mdash;of the
Mandan Tribe may be ascribed!
</p>

<p>
There are numerous other data in Mr. Catlin's work which
seem to afford illustrations of the mutability of Human
Physiology. The Indians who live among the Whites he
describes as <q>Pale</q> Red. May not the change implied in
<pb n='l'/><anchor id='Pgl'/>
this expression be referred to an abandonment of their original
life of activity and exposure on the wild Prairie, quite as much
as to misfortune or a mixture of European blood? The variety
of Physiognomy among the different tribes, as shown
by his admirable portraits of Chiefs, &amp;c., is very extraordinary.
Some of these countenances are ugly and unprepossessing;
but in others the finest European features occur! The traits
exhibited by these portraits are contrary to the inference
which Humboldt's description might suggest, viz., that all the
N. A. Indian Tribes resemble the Mongol Race in features
as well as in the colour of their skin and the absence of beard.
</p>

<p>
The Indian shows no want of acuteness in detecting the
characteristic vices, whether real or imaginary, of the civilized
world.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>On one occasion, when I had interrogated a Sioux chief,
on the Upper Missouri, about their government, their
punishments, and tortures of prisoners, for which I had
freely condemned them for the cruelty of practice, he took
occasion, when I had got through, to ask me some questions
relative to modes in the civilized world. He told me
he had often heard that white people hung their criminals
by the neck and choked them to death like dogs, and those
their own people; to which I answered <q>Yes.</q> He then told
me he had learned that they shut each other up in prisons,
where they keep them a great part of their lives because they
can't pay money! I replied in the affirmative to this, which
occasioned great surprise and excessive laughter even
amongst the women! He told me that he had been to our
Fort at Council Bluffs, where we had a great many warriors
and braves, and he saw three of them taken out on the
prairies and tied to a post and whipped almost to death; and
he had been told that they submit to all this to get a little
money!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He put to me a chapter of other questions as to the trespasses
(of the Whites) on their lands, their continual corruption
<pb n='li'/><anchor id='Pgli'/>
of the morals of their women, and digging open the
Indian's graves to get their bones, &amp;c. To all of which I
was compelled to reply in the affirmative, and quite glad to
close my note book, and quietly to escape from the throng
that had collected around me, and saying (though to myself
and silently), that these and a hundred others are vices
that belong to the civilized world, and are practised upon
(but certainly in no instance reciprocated by) <q>the cruel and
relentless</q> savage!</q>
</p>

<p>
It is probable that the finer features of the North American
Indian character may be ascribed in a great measure to the
elevated nature of their religious belief, which indisputably
appears to be quite free from the loathsome and debasing
idolatry of the Hindoos and other pagan nations of the Old
World.
</p>

<p>
<q>I fearlessly assert to the world (and I defy contradiction),
that the North American Indian is everywhere in his native
state a highly moral and religious being, endowed by his
Maker with an intuitive knowledge of some great Author
of his being and the universe, in dread of whose displeasure
he constantly lives, with the apprehension before him of a
future state, where he expects to be rewarded or punished
according to the merits he has gained or forfeited in this
world.</q>
</p>

<p>
In their native state, in regions remote from the Whites,
the Indians are well clothed and fed, cleanly in their habits,
cheerful, and healthy. The opposite qualities have been considered
to be characteristic of the race, in consequence of the
unhappy condition of most of those Tribes who are found
among or near the settlements of the Whites, a condition
ascribable to the use of ardent spirits, the destruction of the
game on which they originally subsisted, and the fraudulent
manner in which they have often been deprived of their
lands!
</p>

<pb n='lii'/><anchor id='Pglii'/>

<p>
<q>From what I have seen of these people I feel authorized
to say, that there is nothing very strange or unaccountable
in their character; but that it is a simple one, and easy to
be understood if the right means be taken to familiarize
ourselves with it. Although it has dark spots, yet there is
much in it to be applauded, and much to recommend it to
the admiration of the enlightened world. And I trust that
the reader who looks through these volumes with care, will
be disposed to join me in the conclusion, that the North
American Indian in his native state is an honest, hospitable,
faithful, brave, warlike, cruel, revengeful, relentless, yet
honorable, contemplative, and religious being.</q>
</p>

<p>
The tortures practised by the Indians on their prisoners of
war are, it seems, inflicted only on a portion of their captives
by way of reprisal. The prisoners are for the most
part adopted into the conquering tribe. The men are married
to the wives of those who have fallen in battle; and
those outrages on the weaker sex which have disgraced the
armies of civilized Europe are unknown in the annals of
Indian warfare!
</p>

<p>
The Indian is reckless of life, and the female sex among
these tribes is consigned to a life of servitude. But it must
be asked, is the morality of European nations uniformly
founded on an earnest regard for the claims of humanity&mdash;on
a tender respect for the rights and for the sufferings of the
weak and defenceless! This is a momentous question, to
which an answer at once humiliating and complete may be
drawn from one single historical incident described in the
following touching passage!
</p>

<p>
After noticing the defective state of the European law of
nations in certain respects, the author from whose work the
following narrative has been derived, thus proceeds: <q rend='pre'>The
other case in which it seems to me that the law of nations
should either be amended, or declared more clearly and enforced
<pb n='liii'/><anchor id='Pgliii'/>
in practice, is that of the blockade of towns not defended
by their inhabitants, in order to force their surrender by starvation.
And here let us try to realize to ourselves what such a
blockade is. We need not, unhappily, draw a fancied picture;
history, and no remote history either, will supply us
with the facts. Some of you, I doubt not, remember
Genoa; you have seen that queenly city, with its streets of
palaces rising tier above tier from the water, girdling with
the long lines of its bright white houses the vast sweep of
its harbour, the mouth of which is marked by a huge
natural mole of rock, crowned by its magnificent lighthouse-tower.
You remember how its white houses rose out of a
mass of fig, and olive, and orange trees, the glory of its old
patrician luxury; you may have observed the mountains
behind the town, spotted at intervals by small circular low
towers, one of which is distinctly conspicuous where the
ridge of the hills rises to its summit and hides from view
all the country behind it. Those towers are the forts of the
famous lines; which, curiously resembling in shape the later
Syracusan walls inclosing Epipolæ;, converge inland from
the eastern and western extremities of the city, looking
down the western line of the valley of Pulcevera, the
eastern on that of the Bisagno, till they meet as I have said
on the summit of the mountains, where the hills cease to
rise from the sea and become more or less of a table-land,
running off towards the interior at the distance, as well as I
remember, of between two and three miles from the outside of
the city. Thus a very large open space is inclosed within
the lines, and Genoa is capable therefore of becoming a vast
entrenched camp, holding not so much a garrison as an
army. In the autumn of 1799, the Austrians had driven
the French out of Lombardy and Piedmont; their last victory
of Fossano or Genola, had won the fortress of Coni or
Cuneo close under the Alps, and at the very extremity of
<pb n='liv'/><anchor id='Pgliv'/>
the plain of the Po. The French clung to Italy only by
their hold of the Riviera of Genoa, the narrow strip of coast
between the Apennines and the sea, which extends from
the frontiers of France almost to the mouth of the Arno.
Hither the remains of the French force were collected, commanded
by General Massena, and the point of chief importance
to his defence was the city of Genoa.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Napoleon had just returned from Egypt, and was become
First Consul; but he could not be expected to take the field
till the following spring, and till then Massena was hopeless
of relief from without, everything was to depend upon his
own pertinacity. The strength of his army made it impossible
to force it in such a position as Genoa; but its very numbers,
added to the population of the city, held out to the enemy
a hope of reducing it by famine; and as Genoa derives most
of its supplies by sea, Lord Keith, the British naval Commander
in Chief in the Mediterranean, lent the assistance
of his naval force to the Austrians, and by the vigilance of
his cruizers, the whole coasting trade right and left was effectually
cut off. It is not at once that the inhabitants
of a great city, accustomed to the daily sight of well-stored
shops and an abundant market, begin to realize the idea
of scarcity; or that the wealthy classes of society, who have
never known any other state than one of abundance and
luxury, begin seriously to conceive of famine. But the shops
were emptied, and the storehouses began to be drawn upon;
and no fresh supply or hope of supply appeared. Winter
passed away, and Spring returned, so early and so beautiful
on that garden-like coast, sheltered as it is from the north
winds by its belt of mountains, and open to the full rays of
the Southern Sun. Spring returned, and clothed the hill
sides within the lines with its fresh verdure. But that verdure
was no more the delight of the careless eye of luxury,
refreshing the citizens by its loveliness and softness when
<pb n='lv'/><anchor id='Pglv'/>
they rode or walked up thither from the city to enjoy the
surpassing beauty of the prospect! The green hill sides
were now visited for a very different object; ladies of the
highest rank might be seen cutting up every plant which
it was possible to turn to food, and bearing home the common
weeds of our road sides as a most precious treasure!
The French general pitied the distress of the people; but
the lives and the strength of his garrison seemed to him
more important than the lives of the Genoese, and such
provisions as remained were reserved in the first place for
the French army. Scarcity became utter want, and want
became famine! In the most gorgeous palaces of that gorgeous
city, no less than in the humblest tenements of the
poor, death was busy; not the momentary death of battle
or massacre, nor the speedy death of pestilence, but the
lingering and most miserable death of famine! Infants died
before their parents' eyes, husbands and wives lay down to
expire together! A man whom I saw at Genoa in 1825
told me that his father and two of his brothers had been
starved to death in this fatal siege. So it went on, till in
the month of June, when Napoleon had already descended
from the Alps into the plain of Lombardy, the misery became
unendurable, and Massena surrendered. But before
he did so, twenty thousand innocent persons, old and young,
women and children, had died by the most horrible of deaths
which humanity can endure! Other horrors which occurred
besides during the blockade I pass over; the agonizing death
of twenty thousand innocent and helpless persons requires
nothing to be added to it!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Now is it right that such a tragedy as this should take
place, and that the laws of war should be supposed to justify
the authors of it? Conceive having been a naval officer in
Lord Keith's squadron at that time, and being employed in
stopping the food which was being brought for the relief of
<pb n='lvi'/><anchor id='Pglvi'/>
such misery! For the thing was done deliberately; the
helplessness of the Genoese was known, their distress was
known; it was known that they could not force Massena to
surrender; it was known that they were dying daily by
hundreds; yet week after week, and month after month,
did the British ships of war keep their iron watch along all
the coast: no vessel nor boat laden with any article of
provision could escape their vigilance! One cannot but be
thankful that Nelson was spared from commanding at this
horrible blockade of Genoa!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Now on which side the law of Nations should throw the guilt
of most atrocious murder is of little comparative consequence
or whether it should attach to both sides equally: but that the
deliberate starving to death of twenty thousand helpless persons
should be regarded as a crime in one or in both of
the parties concerned in it seems to me self-evident! The
simplest course would seem to be that all non-combatants
should be allowed to go out of a blockaded town, and that
the general who should refuse to let them pass should be
regarded in the same light as one who were to murder his
prisoners or who were in the habit of butchering women and
children.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is not intended to be suggested that the morality of the
more virtuous and religious members of civilized communities
is not superior to that of uncivilized races. But that such
superiority can be claimed by the mass of the inhabitants of
Europe is a proposition of which the evidence must be allowed
to be doubtful as regards some&mdash;must be allowed, alas! to
fail altogether as regards many&mdash;of those virtues of which our
nature is capable!
</p>

<p>
Yet, notwithstanding many melancholy facts that seem to
be repugnant to such a conclusion, there exist satisfactory
grounds for inferring that civilization has a direct tendency to
<pb n='lvii'/><anchor id='Pglvii'/>
promote the moral improvement of the Human Race, and that
our species is probably destined even in this state of existence,
to a course not only of social, but also of a moral progression!
Of this truth distinct indications may be recognized in the
altered sentiments of European nations on many momentous
subjects, as evinced in the increasing aversion to wars of aggression&mdash;in
the general condemnation of the principle&mdash;and
the extensive abolition of the practice&mdash;of slavery, and in the
rapid growth of an earnest sympathy, at once generous and
humane, with the claims and the sufferings of the more unprotected
branches of mankind! Of the practical results of these
changes in the moral sentiments of Society&mdash;of which Christianity,
which teaches that all men are of one blood and of one
family, has been the primary source&mdash;and of which the English
nation&mdash;influenced by the example of a few men of extraordinary
piety, wisdom, and humanity, to whom it gave birth in
the last generation, have been the most conspicuous instruments&mdash;one
example may be appropriately introduced in this place.
</p>

<p>
<q>The original proprietors of this fine soil, (the neighbourhood
of the Cape of Good Hope,) the poor Hottentots, the
fabricated tales of whose filthiness are known to every schoolboy,
and have made them proverbial in every nation of Europe,
are probably the simplest and most inoffensive of the human
race. By open robbery and murder, and by a cruel and persevering
system of oppression on the part of the Dutch colonists,
they have been reduced to not much more than 15,000
souls. Under the protection of the British government, by the
careful instruction of the missionaries, and their increased
importance in the colony as labourers since the abolition of the
slave trade, their number is now considerably on the increase;
General Craig, after the capture of the Cape, brought forward,
experimentally, the physical and moral qualities of
this most injured and degraded people, by forming them into
a military corps, which, in point of discipline, obedience,
<pb n='lviii'/><anchor id='Pglviii'/>
instruction and cleanliness, were not at all behind European
troops. The truth is that the filthy appearance of the
Hottentot was never from choice, but necessity. The anxiety
which he now shows to get quit of his sheep-skin clothing for
cotton, linen, or woollen, and to keep his person clean, proves
that he is far more sensible than the <q>Boor</q> to the comforts of
civilized life. <q>Whosoever,</q> says the excellent Mr. Latrobe,
the father of the Moravians in this country, <q>charges the
Hottentots with being inferior to other people of the same
class as to education and the means of improvement, knows
nothing about them. They are in general more sensible,
and possess better judgment than most Europeans, equally
destitute of the means of instruction.</q> At Bavians Kloof,
or the Monkey's Ravine, which General Jansens altered into
Gandenthal, or the Valley of Grace, 130 miles E. by N. of
Cape Town, is an establishment of these poor despised
people under the care of missionaries, founded in 1737. It
consists of a beautiful village containing 1400 Hottentot
inhabitants. Every cottage has a garden, a few of the poor
class still wear sheep skins, and their children go naked, but
far the greater part of them make a point of providing themselves
with jackets and trousers, and other articles of
European dress which they already wear on Sundays. Both
before and after meals they sing grace in the sweetest tones
imaginable. The place externally, appears a little Paradise,
and let it be remembered it is only one of a great number
of these missionary stations. The Hottentots are of a deep
brown or yellow brown colour, their eyes are pure white,
their head is small; the face very wide above, ends in a
point; their cheek-bones are prominent, their eyes sunk, the
nose flat, the lips thick, the teeth white, and the hand and
foot rather small. They are well made and tall, their hair is
black, either curled or woolly, and they have little or no
beard. Barrow and Grandprè conceive them to be of a
<pb n='lix'/><anchor id='Pglix'/>
Chinese origin, they call themselves Gkhui-gkhui, pronounced
with a click of the tongue or throat, and say they
do not come from the interior, but from over the Sea! The
Hottentots are divided into several Tribes.</q><note place='foot'>Bell's Geography.</note>
</p>

<p>
The nature of their language shows very clearly that the Hottentots
are not closely connected by descent with the Chinese;
the tradition that they came originally from a country beyond
the sea might apply to the island of Madagascar where a dialect
kindred to theirs is spoken. There seems however every
reason for concluding, agreeably to Dr. Prichard's views, that
the Hottentots are descendants of Colonists impelled by the
ordinary causes of migration from the North and Middle of
Africa, who, as they finally occupied the farthest extremity,
were probably the earliest inhabitants of that Continent. The
evidence of language serves in a very striking manner to confirm
this conclusion. For proofs of the connexion of the Hottentot
dialects with the Egyptian and with the Negro languages, see
Appendix A. The Hottentot dialects abound also in words
unequivocally identical with the corresponding terms in ancient
European and Asiatic languages, as for instance Imine,
<q>A Day,</q> and Ki, <q>The Earth,</q> with the Greek. Surrie, Sore,
<q>The Sun</q>, with the Sanscrit <q>Surya.</q> Mamma, <q>A Mother,</q>
with the Latin, &amp;c. Bo Aboob, <q>A Father,</q> with <q>Abba,</q>
Hebrew. Tamma, <q>The Tongue.</q> (See p. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, &amp;c. &amp;c.) Coincidences
of this nature are proofs of that species of generic
connexion with all the other races of mankind which might
be expected as a consequence of a separation that, judging
from the Geographical position of the Hottentot tribes, we
may suppose to have occurred in the earliest ages of the world.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='lx'/><anchor id='Pglx'/>

<div>
<head>Proofs of the Identity of the Basque with other Languages.</head>

<p>
The following specimens of the Basque, which have been
introduced in illustration of the previous statement, at p. <ref target='Pgxxxv'><hi rend='smallcaps'>xxxv</hi></ref>,
include nearly all those words which are in most common
use (with the exception of that class of Words which is
noticed in <ref target='Appendix_A'>Appendix A</ref>). By referring to the passages in
this work, noticed below, the identity of the Basque words
with those of other nations will be readily seen.
</p>

<p>
<q>A Father.</q> Aita (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>,) Atta (<hi rend='italic'>Gothic</hi>), p. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, Eiōth (<hi rend='italic'>Egyptian</hi>,)&mdash;<q>A
Mother.</q> A.m.a. (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>,) A.m. (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>),
see p. <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<q>Earth.</q> Erria (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), Erde (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>), A.r.ts (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>Water.</q> Ura (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), Ur (<hi rend='italic'>Siberians</hi>), see p. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<q>A Stream.</q> Ibaya (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), see p. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<q>Dog.</q> Potzoa (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), Psit (<hi rend='italic'>Bohemian</hi>), Pesia (<hi rend='italic'>Russian</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
Ora (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), Ouhor (<hi rend='italic'>Egyptian</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>Cat.</q> Catua (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), see p. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ox.</q> Idia (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), Ei di on (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>Cow.</q> Bihia (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), Bee ouch (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>Bull.</q> Cecena (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), Uxen, Ukshhan (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>), Ox, Oxen
(<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>Goat.</q> A qu erra (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), see p. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<q>A Lamb.</q> A-churria, p. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, Umerria (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), A.m.r
(<hi rend='italic'>Chaldæ</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>Swine.</q> Charria Cherria (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), Xoir-os (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), see p. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<q>A Bear.</q> Artsa (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), Arth (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>), Arcturus (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>),
Arktos (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
The identity of the following words with equivalent terms
in the English, &amp;c. will be obvious.
</p>

<p>
<q>Bread of Maize.</q> Artoa (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), Artos <q>Bread; Food</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>An Arrow.</q> Istoa (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), Ios Oistos (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>A Raven; Black.</q> Balcha Belcha (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>End.</q> Ondoa (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>To Go.</q> Gan (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), Gang (<hi rend='italic'>Lowland Scotch</hi>), Gehen (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>To Sell.</q> Saldu (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>Zeal.</q> Kharra (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), C'H.r.a (<hi rend='italic'>Chaldoe</hi>), C'H.r.e (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>Morning.</q> Bora (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>), Biar (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>To shine very brightly.</q> B.c.r (<hi rend='italic'>Arabic</hi>.)
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Plan Of This Investigation.
Lord Bacon's Principles Applicable To Inquiries
Into The Origin And Changes Of Human Languages.</head>

<p>
The fanciful theories in which even some of the most distinguished
writers have deemed themselves at liberty to indulge,
when they have entered upon the field of Philological
research, have naturally tended to create, among men of calm
and dispassionate minds, a general distrust in the results of
all inquiries into the origin and early history of human languages.
But it must be obvious that the errors into which the
first inquirers on this&mdash;as on every other&mdash;subject have been
betrayed is not a fair test of the attention due to Philological
investigations. In this, as in every branch of human knowledge,
the authenticity of the results must be tested solely
with reference to the principles appealed to, and the weight,
amount, and consistency of the evidence adduced. In this,
as in every other branch of knowledge, the value of those results
must depend solely on the interest and importance of
the truths which such results may involve.
</p>

<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>

<p>
In the following pages are developed proofs of two leading
propositions, viz.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
1. That the languages of the continents of Asia, Europe,
Africa, and America, were originally the same.
</p>

<p>
2. That the differences which exist between the individual
languages of those continents may be explained consistently
with the proofs of original unity, by causes
still in operation.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
In this place, the principles appealed to in elucidation of
these propositions may be explained with advantage.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
1. As regards the proofs adduced of the original unity of
the languages of the four continents.
</quote>

<p>
These proofs are in no instance founded upon speculation
or surmise. They consist in every instance, either of a comparison
of terms absolutely identical in sound and sense, or
of terms, of which the mutual connexion is equally certain,
in accordance with those principles, with respect to which
philosophical writers on language are agreed. Terms belonging
to two different continents have been compared in
those instances only, in which the affinities are of the same
nature, as those which have been shown to be characteristic
of words belonging to different dialects of the same language,
in the writings of Court Ghebelin, Horne Tooke,
Adam Smith, Dugald Stewart, Humboldt, and Du Ponceau.
These great writers do not belong to the class of Philological
speculators, but to that of authorities on the origin and mutations
of human tongues.
</p>

<p>
Hence it follows that the leading doctrine laid down by
Lord Bacon as applicable to the investigations of Physical
science applies equally in this instance to the researches of
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
the Philologist; I allude to the following fundamental maxim:
Experience is the only legitimate guide to <emph>Truth</emph>; hence an
accurate investigation of those facts which are <emph>within</emph> the
limits of our historical knowledge, forms the only admissible
basis of deduction, with respect to those facts which are <emph>beyond</emph>
the range of our actual experience.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
2. Not less applicable is the same maxim in elucidation of
the second proposition, viz.: <q>That the differences
which exist between individual languages may be
explained, consistently with the proofs of original
unity, by causes still in operation.</q>
</quote>

<p>
This principle may be applied in the following manner:
</p>

<p>
There are certain languages of which the original unity can
be proved, either by the extrinsic evidence of history, or by
the gradual approximation they display as we ascend from
modern to earlier epochs, and compare modern with <emph>ancient</emph>
specimens. We can show, by means of the like evidence, the
progressive changes they have undergone, and the nature of
the existing differences which have been the result of those
changes.
</p>

<p>
There is another class of languages which came into
existence during periods with regard to which we do <emph>not</emph> possess
the light of history; and the only source from which we
can draw our conclusions, with respect to the relations that
originally existed between them, is the internal evidence afforded
by the composition and structure of those languages
themselves. History being silent, this is the only clue by
which we can determine whether they were originally distinct,
or derived from a common source.
</p>

<p>
But by what rules are we to be guided in the deductions
we may form from the mere texture of dialects of the second
class?
</p>

<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>

<quote rend='display'>
The answer is, that the rules to be pursued in forming our
conclusions, with respect to the original relations of
those languages which <emph>can not</emph> be historically traced to
their source, must be drawn from the experience furnished
by that class of languages of which the transitions
<emph>can</emph> be traced by means of the independent
evidence of history.
</quote>

<p>
It will be shown that the <emph>existing</emph> relations between these
two different classes of languages <emph>are</emph>, and therefore we may
infer that the <emph>original</emph> relations <emph>were</emph>, the same.
</p>

<p>
By the adoption of these principles of investigation as regards
both: 1, The Resemblances, and also 2, The Differences,
which Human Tongues display, the great maxim of
Lord Bacon's philosophy will become legitimately applicable
to language, and the researches of the Philologist may be
directed by the same criteria, and his conclusions vindicated
by the same tests as those which apply to the investigations
of the inquirer into Physical phenomena.
</p>

<p>
It is upon these principles that I propose to conduct the
inquiry of which the results are embodied in these pages.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I.
On The Evidence Furnished By A Comparison Of
Their Languages Of The Original Unity Of The
Various Nations Of The Continents Of Asia,
Europe, Africa, And America.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Absolute Identity of the Languages of the Four
Continents when compared collectively.
</p>

<p>
Illustrations from the Names of the Gods of Egypt,
Greece, Italy, and India, showing the Origin of
Idolatry.
</p>

<p>
North American Indian Names for <q>The Great Spirit.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
The proposition which forms the subject of this Chapter
will be supported through the course of this work by the
progressive development of a series of various but mutually
connected proofs, which&mdash;both by their individual force, and
by their harmonious combination,&mdash;will be found to be conclusive.
</p>

<p>
But of these proofs there is only one branch which admits
of being conveniently adverted to in this place. I allude to
the evidence collected in Appendix A, in the form of a <q>Comparison
of the most Common Terms in the African, Asiatic,
European and American languages.</q> This comparison, though
composing only a part of the proofs adduced, will be found
to involve in itself evidence sufficient to establish the suggested
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
conclusion, Moreover, the evidence therein embodied,&mdash;though
copious in details, and strictly conforming to
the principles laid down by philosophical writers on language,
is simple in its nature and results, which may readily be appreciated
by inquirers totally unaccustomed to philological
investigations. For these reasons, the comparison instituted
in Appendix A forms an appropriate subject of examination
at the commencement of this work.
</p>

<p>
Here, however, it must be premised that it will be impossible,
without a complete perusal, to form a correct appreciation
either of the facts or of the consequences developed
in that Appendix. The explanations I shall present in this
place must be viewed, therefore, in the light of a general and
imperfect outline only. These explanations will be directed
to&mdash;
</p>

<p>
I. The Nature,
</p>

<p>
II. The Results of the Comparison contained in Appendix A.
</p>

<p>
I. <hi rend='italic'>Of the Nature of the Comparison in Appendix A.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The languages of Africa have been chosen as the basis or
<emph>subject</emph> of comparison with which the languages of the other
three continents have been collated.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
This arrangement has been dictated by a consideration of
the comparatively slight attention which has hitherto been
paid to the languages of the Central and Southern Regions
of Africa; and also by the peculiar physiology of the Negro
and Hottentot tribes, which has induced some physiologists
to refer the origin of these tribes to Races totally distinct from
the other Families of mankind.
</p>

<p>
The extensive researches of Dr. Prichard have satisfactorily
shown that the peculiarities of the Negroes and Hottentots
are not permanent nor abruptly marked, but local and evanescent,
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
and that they melt away by nice shades of gradation,
corresponding with the minute progressive transitions of
climate that are traceable through the various regions of the
African continent. Hence the <emph>possibility</emph> of the identity of
the Negro and Hottentot Tribes with the inhabitants of the
other three great continents may be clearly inferred. But no
evidence has yet been produced calculated to establish this
conclusion as a positive truth. This desideratum the aid of
philology will be found satisfactorily to supply.
</p>

<p>
In the North of Africa the physiological difficulties which
are encountered in the Middle and South do not exist to the
same extent in any instance, and in most instances they can
scarcely be said to exist at all. The Berbers&mdash;the original
population of Morocco and the adjoining countries, the lineal
descendants of the ancient Numidians&mdash;approach very closely
to the Spanish population of the opposite coasts of the
Mediterranean; and the Egyptians in the north-east of Africa
are much more alike to the contiguous Asiatic nations than
they are to the Negro Tribes. Hence it follows that the
theory that the Negroes and Southern Africans are distinct
Races of men, may be as decisively tested by a comparison
of their languages with those of the Northern Africans, as by
collating them with the languages of the other continents of
the globe.
</p>

<p>
The mode of comparison adopted in Appendix A, has been
dictated by these considerations. Accordingly, I have therein
separated the languages of Africa into three divisions, those
of: 1, North Africa; 2, Negro-land; 3, South Africa; allotting
a separate column to each division; while on the opposite
page a separate column is devoted to each of the continents
of Asia, Europe, and America. This comparison will serve
at once to show the general connexion of the African languages
with those of Asia, Europe, and America, and at the
same time to demonstrate another proposition of nearly equal
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
interest, viz. the close mutual affinity of the languages of
Northern, Tropical, and Southern Africa.
</p>

<p>
With respect to the particular words selected for comparison,
I have chosen the names for the following objects:
<q>Fire, Sun, Day, Eye,<note place='foot'>The African names for <q>The Nose</q> do not occur in Appendix A, but they
are noticed elsewhere in this work. The names for <q>The Eye</q> are explained
among words for <q>The Sun,</q> &amp;c. of which they are generally derivatives.</note> Moon, Heaven, a Human Being,
Man and Woman.</q> (Homo, Vir, Fœmina, <hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>.) The most
important parts of the Human Frame, (viz. <q>The Hand, Arm,
Foot, Leg, Ear, Tongue, Head.</q>) <q>Water.</q>
</p>

<p>
These terms comprise nearly all the specimens of the languages
of Africa, which have been collected in <q>the Mithridates,</q>
of Adelung and Vater. The objects to which these
terms have been applied are comparatively few. But for
reasons about to be explained, the evidence which may be
deduced from the terms themselves is neither scanty nor imperfect,
but, on the contrary, very extensive and complete.
</p>

<p>
The African names for the above-mentioned objects analysed
in Appendix A, amount to about 700. The corresponding
and analogous terms introduced from the other three Continents
are about treble that number.
</p>

<p>
In determining the mutual relations of different languages,
it is obviously not necessary to compare the whole of their
component parts. All that is required is a comparison of
such portions of each as may be justly viewed in the light of
a satisfactory test. That the selected specimens of the languages
of Africa are sufficiently <emph>numerous</emph> for this end is plain.
It only remains to be shown that their <emph>nature</emph> is such as to
render them eminently suitable and conclusive.
</p>

<p>
Now it will be clear from the following considerations, that
these specimens are peculiarly calculated to serve as a decisive
test of the general composition and structure of languages.
</p>

<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>

<p>
Terms for the Objects above enumerated will be found
to include the greatest portion of the primary elements
of all languages.<note place='foot'>The terms for the Domestic Relations are in some instances compound
words&mdash;in others they seem to be identical with the Names of the Human Race.</note>
</p>

<p>
This proposition may be placed in the clearest light by
means even of comparatively modern languages, for both
modern and ancient tongues will be found principally to consist
of the following elements:
</p>

<p>
1. The nouns above mentioned. Such nouns are in fact
the names of the most familiar and conspicuous objects; of
those objects which are common to all ages and countries.
</p>

<p>
Verbs descriptive of the functions of such objects.
</p>

<p>
2. Names of Animals and Birds.
</p>

<p>
3. Names of Rivers, the Ocean, Hills, and Mountains.
</p>

<p>
4. Words expressive of Mental Qualities and Emotions.
</p>

<p>
5. Pronouns and other Conventional Grammatical Forms.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
1. Now, with the exception of the second, all these five classes
of words may be shown to be mere modifications of those of
the 1st class.
</p>

<p>
2. Moreover, as regards even the Second Class, names of
Animals and Birds, terms of this description are also in a
great number, perhaps in the majority of instances compounds
chiefly consisting of terms of the First Class, viz., of the words
for the <q>Members of the Body,</q> for <q>Water, Fire,</q> &amp;c., as in
<q>Red-<hi rend='italic'>breast</hi>,</q> <q><hi rend='italic'>Water-wag</hi> tail</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>). Sgyvarn-og <q>a
Hare,</q> from Sgyvarn <q>an Ear</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>).
</p>

<p>
There are, it is true, some terms of this class of a more
primitive origin, as they plainly consist of imitations of the
characteristic cry or note of the Animal or Bird named, as for
example <q>Cuck-oo</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>); <q>U-lu-la</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Swedish</hi>), <q>U-lu-l-aka</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>), <q>An Owl.</q> But then it is plain that words
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
of this kind are for the most part confined in their application
to the objects designated and do not enter largely into the
composition of languages.
</p>

<p>
3. Words for <q>Rivers</q> and <q>The Ocean</q> consist of terms
for <q>Water.</q>
</p>

<p>
For example: <q>The Esk</q> is from Eask (<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>), and Esseg
(<hi rend='italic'>Dongolan, North Africa</hi>), <q>Water.</q> <q>The Usk</q> or <q>Ou-isg,</q>
as the word is pronounced by the Welsh, from Uisge, <q>Water</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>), connected with Eask (<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>). <q>The Ayr</q> is identical
with A.r. <q>A River,</q> also <q>To flow</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>), <q>The Yarrow</q>
with Iaro (<hi rend='italic'>Egyptian</hi>), and the Hebrew words Ee.a.ou.r
Ee.a.r (modifications of A.r, <hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>). Some able Celtic
scholars have attempted to explain the origin of such names
as <q>Ayr and Yarrow,</q> which are very common as names of
rivers in Celtic countries, by means of a Celtic term which
means <q>Gentle,</q> an explanation very inapplicable in many
instances. The error of these writers arises from the assumption
they are prone to adopt, that the Celtic is an
unchanged language, the truth being that the changes which
it can be shown to have undergone in more recent times,
form a distinct ground for the conclusion that, long prior to
the earliest period to which our most ancient Celtic specimens
can be referred, the Celts must have lost many words
which their forefathers brought with them from the East.
</p>

<p>
In the names above noticed, not only the general features,
but the finer shades of inflection of the Oriental words reappear.
</p>

<p>
Numerous examples may be pointed out, of words applied
in some languages to <q>Water</q> generally, appropriated exclusively,
in others to the <q>Sea or Ocean.</q> Thus we have Shui
in Chinese, and Su in <hi rend='italic'>Turkish</hi>, <q>Water.</q> In the <hi rend='italic'>German</hi> See,
the <hi rend='italic'>Anglo Saxon</hi> Seo Sae, the <hi rend='italic'>English</hi> <q>Sea,</q> and in other
analogous terms to be met with in all the Gothic tongues, we
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
recognize the same term as a word for a <q>Lake,</q> or for <q>The
Sea.</q> Adelung has pointed out the resemblance which in
some other instances the Turkish bears to the German.
The ancestors of the Turks and Germans, it may be observed,
are both traceable to contiguous regions of Northern Asia,
the great <q>High Road of Nations</q> from China to Europe.
</p>

<p>
Again, in various dialects of the North American Indians
we meet with Oghnacauno, Oneekanoosh, &amp;c. <q>Water.</q> In
Latin and Greek we find the same term <q>Ocean-os, Ocean-oio</q>,
&amp;c., applied exclusively to <q>The Ocean.</q> (See for other examples
Appendix A, p. <ref target='PgApA077'>77</ref>.)
</p>

<p>
Words for Mountains and Hills are almost universally
identical with words for <q>The Head, The Back, The Breast,</q>
&amp;c. Thus even in the English, in which the first meanings
of words are often lost, we have <q>Ridge</q> (A Back and A Hill),
<q>Head-land,</q> <q><hi rend='italic'>Saddle-back</hi></q> (the name of a mountain.) In
the Principality of Wales, in which a less changed and a less
conventional language prevails, the common names for hills,
<q>Cevn, Pen, Vron,</q> &amp;c., are words for <q>The Back, The Head,
The Breast,</q> &amp;c., appropriated according to the particular
<emph>shapes</emph> of the hills. The same words, as will appear hereafter,
were used as names of mountains in ancient Gaul and
Spain, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Jugum, <q><hi rend='italic'>A Yoke</hi> and A Hill,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>,) Cadair Idris, <q>The
chair of Idris,</q> A Fabulous Giant and Astronomer, (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>,)
are instances of metaphors of a different kind. But generally
names of hills are traceable as above described, and are
therefore mere forms of terms belonging to the first class.
</p>

<p>
4. That terms of this Class, viz.: Words descriptive of the
Operations and Emotions of the Mind, consist of metaphors
derived from words originally appropriated to physical objects
and agencies, has been indisputably proved by the celebrated
French writer, Court Ghebelin, and by Horne Tooke,
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
whose researches were applied to the analysis of the English
language only. Words appropriated to the members of
the Human Frame and their Functions, and other terms of
the First CIass, are the chief sources of these metaphorical
terms.
</p>

<p>
This philological maxim was supposed by some of the most
eminent of those writers by whom it was established, to furnish
an argument in favour of the doctrines of Materialism,
as when, for example, the English word <q>Spirit</q> was derived
from the Latin word for <q>Breath,</q> Spiritus. But the premises
do not appear to furnish any solid support to the inferences
they were thought to favour. The same Consciousness
which in this case, and in other similar instances, perceives
an analogy, perceives also that the connexion is one of analogy
only. The true explanation of the relations which exist
between these two classes of words may, I conceive, be derived
from the consideration, that though Man is endowed with
moral and intellectual, as well as with perceptive, faculties,&mdash;inasmuch
as the perceptive powers are earliest exercised,&mdash;the
language of his higher sentiments consists of metaphors
thence borrowed. <q>The Hand,</q> in like manner, as may be
inferred from several examples which occur in the course of
this work, has, in many instances, metaphorically given names
to some of the less conspicuous bodily organs of perception.
At the same time, the soundness of the philological principle
developed by Ghebelin and Horne Tooke can not reasonably
be disputed. In these pages will be found numerous illustrations
of its truth. Moreover it will appear that this principle
forms the basis of some of the most convincing proofs&mdash;that
languages afford&mdash;of the common origin of nations very remotely
situated from each other, as of the Welsh and English,
for example, with the Hebrew, and other ancient Syro-Phœnician
nations.
</p>

<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>

<p>
5. As regards Pronouns and other Grammatical Forms.
</p>

<p>
Pronouns enter very largely into the composition of languages,
not merely in a separate form, but also as the source
from which the most striking peculiarities of other parts of
grammar have been derived. It has been shown by Dr.
Prichard that the various inflections which distinguish the
different persons of the Verb in the Latin and Sanscrit,
and other highly-complicated languages of the same class,
are identical with pronouns.
</p>

<p>
In the works of Horne Tooke and others it has been abundantly
shown that Pronouns are merely Nouns, viz. Names
of the Human Species, <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c. In other words
they belong to a section of the terms of the First Class.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Hence it will be manifest that an analysis, completely embracing
numerous specimens of nouns of the First Class, virtually
embraces also numerous specimens of words of the
Four other Classes, which, together with the First, compose
the principal elements of Human Language. For it must be
observed that&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Though the African nouns belonging to the First Class
form the only basis or subject of inquiry, the inquiry
itself will be found to embrace an extended
comparison of those nouns with the kindred terms of
the Third, Fourth, and Fifth Classes, which are discoverable
in the languages of the other three continents.
</quote>

<p>
Finally, a principle must here be stated and applied, which
will be more fully illustrated hereafter.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
The names of Objects can be shown in a great variety
of instances to be identical with Verbs or terms
descriptive of some dominant or conspicuous quality
which those Objects display.
</quote>

<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>

<p>
This remark applies even to the terms for the Members of
the Human Frame, and other Objects of which the names
are included in the First Class of Words,&mdash;as appears by abundant
illustrations in works of authority and research confined
to an investigation of the European languages. But the same
truth may be much more clearly and unequivocally demonstrated
even by the most cursory examination of more ancient
and therefore more primitive tongues, such as the Hebrew
and the Sanscrit. The application of this principle will be
found to unfold a wide range of facts serving to connect the
languages of Africa with those of the other Continents;
the same terms, which present themselves as Nouns or Conventional
names in the languages of Africa, occurring in
a great variety of examples in those of the other continents,
unaltered or very slightly changed in sound, fulfilling the
functions of the corresponding <emph>descriptive</emph> terms or verbs.
Here it may be remarked that the descriptive or metaphorical
character, which originally belonged to nouns, and the various
modes in which the same objects are susceptible of description,
may be viewed as the source of these numerous names
for the same objects. But this is a subject which will be
more fully discussed in a subsequent part of this work.
</p>

<p>
The following examples will serve to illustrate at once the
principle last stated, and also another principle before suggested,
viz. that <q>The Hand</q><note place='foot'>Probably the terms were not in all cases appropriated in the first instance to
the Hand exclusively, but applied alike to all the perceptive organs.</note> and its perceptions have metaphorically
given names in many instances&mdash;not only to the
faculties of the Mind,&mdash;but also to the other perceptive organs
and their functions. For further illustrations, see Appendix
A, p. <ref target='PgApA065'>65</ref>, and the subsequent pages.
</p>

<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>

<lg>
<l>Tom, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>) <q>To try,</q> <q>To try an experiment,</q> <q>To perceive.</q></l>
<l>Tom, <q>The Hand,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mexico</hi>.)</l>
<l>Tedembeton, <q>The Hand,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Nubia</hi>.)</l>
<l>Thumb (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>), Daum, (<hi rend='italic'>Ger.</hi>)</l>
<l>Teim-law, <q>To Feel,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>To taste,</q> <q>To eat.</q> Tamma, <q>The Tongue,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi>.)</l>
<l><q>Mental Taste,</q> <q>Discernment,</q> <q>Judgment.</q> Tami-as, <q>A Judge,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>.)</l>
<l>Doom, Doomsday, (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>.)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>G.sh. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>), <q>To feel for.</q> Guess, (<hi rend='italic'>Eng</hi>.) See below,</l>
<l>K.s.m, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>G.sh.sh. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>), <q>To feel for repeatedly,</q> Gus-to, <q>To taste, To listen,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>.)</l>
<l><q>To grope for,</q> Kchesi, <q>The Hand,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Finland</hi>.)</l>
<l>Keez, <q>The Hand,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hungarian</hi>.)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>K.s.m. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>), <q>To guess hidden things.</q> <q>To divine,</q> <q>To foretel.</q></l>
<l>Keisio, <q>To seek, To attempt, Endeavour,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.)</l>
</lg>

<p>
These examples instructively display the manner in which
the Hebrew, which is a language of high antiquity, combines
within itself a variety of meanings, which are found only partially
preserved in more modern languages. This venerable
tongue may be said in these, as in numerous other instances,
to confirm, by means of its own intrinsic resources, the results
which are deducible from a wide comparison of other
languages of which our specimens are more modern.
</p>

<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>

<p>
II. <hi rend='italic'>Of the Results of the Comparison, contained in Appendix
A.</hi>
</p>

<p>
When the languages of Africa are compared collectively
with those of the other three Continents, it will be found:
</p>

<p>
1. That the names of the most Common Objects, occurring
in the various dialects of Africa, may be detected, and as it
were <emph>restored</emph>, in the same or in kindred senses in each of the
other three Continents, when all or a considerable portion of
their languages are examined.
</p>

<p>
2. The exceptions to this principle are so insignificant,
that the rule, viewed in the light of a philological maxim, may
be regarded as universal, especially when it is borne in mind
that the specimens we possess of the various languages of
Mankind are undoubtedly incomplete.
</p>

<p>
3. A further remarkable truth is established by Appendix
A, viz.:
</p>

<p>
The resemblances which the African languages display to
those of Asia, &amp;c., are as close as those which the Asiatic languages
exhibit among themselves; and they are as close as
those which the languages termed Indo-European mutually
display.
</p>

<p>
4. What has been stated in the previous explanation of
Result 3 applies to the languages of the continent of America
as well as to those of Africa.
</p>

<p>
5. Not only the same words but the same minute transitions
which words undergo may be recognized in the Four
Continents, and the steps of transition are much more completely
traceable when the various Continents form the subject
of comparison than when the investigation is confined to
one Continent. Compare, for example, (See Appendix A,
p. <ref target='PgApA013'>13</ref>,) Ano, <q>A Day</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Caraibs</hi>); Antu, Antú, <q>The Sun,
A Day</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Araucan, South America</hi>); Antu, Andru, <q>A Day</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Madagascar, South Africa</hi>); Indra, The Indian <q>God of
Day</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit, Asia</hi>); Inti, Indi, <q>The Sun</q> (<hi rend='italic'>South America</hi>).
</p>

<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>

<p>
6. It will be seen that in this instance, and in numerous
other examples, finer shades of transition are restored by
means of a comparison including the Four Continents.
</p>

<p>
7. As regards the Continent of Africa, by this comparison
all its synonymes of the class selected for analysis have, with
a few trifling exceptions, been exhausted. As regards the
other three Continents, so large a portion, probably the great
majority, of these synonymes have been introduced from
every region of those continents, that the evidence thus obtained,
combined as it is with a complete investigation of the
African terms, may be considered as equally conclusive with
the proofs which would have been furnished by an exhaustion
of the synonymes of all the four continents.
</p>

<p>
The examination of synonymous terms is the principle
which has been pursued by Humboldt, in his work on <q>The
Basque,</q> and by Du Ponceau in his Treatise on the <q>Algonquyn
Dialects of the North American Indians.</q> It is the
most satisfactory mode of investigating languages, because it
involves an explanation of the differences as well as of the resemblances
they mutually display.
</p>

<p>
8. Hence it follows that when all the dialects of each continent
are thus compared in the aggregate with those of each
of the other three, the very same language is reproduced by
the reunion of the <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>disjecta membra</foreign>.</q>
</p>

<p>
With reference more especially to the third and fourth
results above stated, I may here advert to the researches
of two philologists of the highest eminence, whose conclusions
will not, in the present state of philological knowledge, be
disputed,&mdash;the German writer Klaproth, and Dr. Prichard:
the former has treated of the proofs of affinity observable
among the Asiatic languages; the latter has discussed the
proofs of mutual resemblance displayed by certain languages
usually classed under the term <q>Indo-European.</q>
</p>

<p>
The affinities which present themselves among the different
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
languages of the single continent of Asia, in the following
examples, have been selected as evidence of the original connexion
of those languages by Klaproth.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Words for <q>The Sun.</q></hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Asia.</hi>&mdash;Chor Churr (<hi rend='italic'>Ossetian.</hi>)</l>
<l>Chor Chorschid (<hi rend='italic'>Persian.</hi>)</l>
<l>Chorschid (<hi rend='italic'>Pehlwi</hi>), Huere (<hi rend='italic'>Zend.</hi>)<note place='foot'>Klaproth's Asia Polyglotta.</note></l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>America.</hi>&mdash;Coaracy, Curasi, Quarassi (<hi rend='italic'>Brazil.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Africa.</hi>&mdash;Koara (<hi rend='italic'>Bosjesmans.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>South Africa.</hi>&mdash;Giro (<hi rend='italic'>Kanga, Negro-land.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
Though the Zend, Pehlwi, and Persian are three kindred
dialects of Persia, it will be observed that the Pehlwi and
Persian words in this example, although clearly allied to the
corresponding Zend word (<hi rend='italic'>Huere</hi>), resemble that word less
than they do the American and African terms. On the other
hand, the next example presents to us American and African
words perfectly identical with this term (Huere).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Words for <q>The Sun</q> and <q>Day.</q></hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Asia.</hi>&mdash;Huere, <q>The Sun,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Zend.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>S. America.</hi>&mdash;Huarassi, <q>The Sun</q> and <q>Day,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Omaguans.</hi>)
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Africa.</hi>&mdash;Hor, Horus, i.e. <q>The God of Day,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</l>
<l>Huer, <q>Day,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Iolofs, Negro-land.</hi>)</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Asia.</hi>&mdash;Eiere,<note place='foot'>Eiere (<q>Day,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zend</hi>,) is obviously connected with Huere (<q>The Sun,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zend</hi>.)</note> <q>Day,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Zend.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Africa.</hi>&mdash;Iirri, <q>The Sun,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Wawu</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Negro-land.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
The connexion between the previous words for the Sun
and the first of the two following classes of terms for the
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
Moon will be manifest. The origin of the relation which is
universally traceable between the names of the two great
Heavenly Luminaries will be found fully discussed in Appendix
A.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Words for <q>The Moon.</q></hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Asia.</hi>&mdash;<q>Wiri Yere Irri</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Samoied</hi>), Wurra (<hi rend='italic'>Sumbava Island.</hi>)<note place='foot'>Klaproth's Asia Polyglotta, p. 36.</note></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Africa, Negro-land.</hi>&mdash;<q>Uhaaire Verr</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Iolofs.</hi>)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Asia.</hi>&mdash;<q>Sāra</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Syrian</hi>), <q>Sāra</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mongol and Calmuck.</hi>)</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Africa, Negro-land.</hi>&mdash;<q>Assara</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Gold Coast.</hi>)</l>
</lg>

<p>
Dr. Prichard has clearly proved the connexion of the
Welsh and other Celtic dialects with the Sanscrit and other
<q>Indo-European</q> tongues, a class in which he considers that
the Celtic dialects ought therefore to be included. The
Welsh and Sanscrit words which occur in Appendix A, p. <ref target='PgApA011'>11</ref>,
have already been compared by him in his work on the
Celtic Languages. The mutual connexion of these words
is clear. But it will be equally manifest that the African
terms which occur in the same passage, Appendix A, p. <ref target='PgApA011'>11</ref>,
are quite as nearly allied to the Welsh words as are the
Sanscrit terms with which those words have been collated by
Dr. Prichard. In some instances they are even more so.
Compare, for example, <q>Lloer,</q> The Moon, (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>,) with the
African word <q>Leoure,</q> The Moon, (from the dialect of the
<q><hi rend='italic'>Fulahs</hi>.</q>)
</p>

<p>
An examination of the names of some of the principal gods
of Egypt, Greece, Italy, and India, by means of a comparison
of the languages of all the Four Continents, will be found in a
very striking manner to illustrate at once the foregoing philological
results, and also the origin of those names, and of
the systems of Idolatry to which they belonged.
</p>

<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hor</hi>. Hor-us, <q>The God of Day,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi>,) already explained.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Indra</hi>, The Indian <q>God of Day,</q> previously explained.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Surya</hi>, The Indian <q>God of the Sun.</q> His Orb personified,
(<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>.) <hi rend='smallcaps'>Osira Osiri</hi>, and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Serap-is or Sorop-is</hi>,
(believed to have been the same as Osiri,) <q>Gods of the Sun,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
The same change of inflection which is observable when
<q>Surya and Osira</q> are compared with Sero-p-is, occurs in the
following:
</p>

<p>
Surie, Sorrie, Sorré, Sore, <q>The Sun,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
Sor o h-b, <q>The Sun,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Corona Hottentots</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
The same change occurs also in the following:
</p>

<p>
Z.e.r, <q>To shine brightly,</q> Sh. r.-ph, <q>To burn,</q>
Sh.r-ph eem, <q>Seraphs,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Auror-a</hi>, <q>The Goddess of The Dawn,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
A.ou.r, <q>Light, Day-light,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
Waōūr, <q>The Dawn,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
Or, <q>Day,</q> Ar-pi, <q>The Sun,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Armenian</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
Wurabe, <q>Day,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Nubia</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
Ē-o-us, One of the Horses of the Sun, Ēō-s (Eō, EōA,
Accusative,) <q>The Sun, The Dawn, The Goddess</q> <q>of The
Dawn,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
Eo o hu, Haou, <q>Day,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>) Uwya Ou, <q>The Sun,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Negroes</hi>.) Huieiou, <q>The Sun,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Caraibs, South America</hi>.)
A u-ō, <q>To shine,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Net-phe</hi>, <q>The Goddess of the Heaven or Firmament,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
Neth-phe Ne-phe ou, <q>The Heavens or Heaven,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
Nev, <q>Heaven,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.) Nebo, <q>Heaven,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Selaronian</hi>.)
</p>

<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ērē</hi> and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Aēr</hi> (Greek), <q>The Goddess of The Heaven
or Atmosphere,</q> <q>Juno.</q>
</p>

<p>
Iru, <q>Heaven,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Negroes</hi>,) Awyr, <q>The Sky,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>,) Aër,
(<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>), <q>Air,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>.)
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Juno</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>), the same as the last. She was also regarded
as <q>The Mother of the Gods.</q> (See this name explained
by means of Sanscrit and Negro words combined,
Appendix A, p. <ref target='PgApA062'>62</ref>.)
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Khem</hi>, A God of <q>The Sun,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
K au m-et, <q>The Sun,</q> K au m-ei, <q>The Moon,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greenland</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
C'h.m.n.-ee.n, <q>Sun Images,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
C'h.m, <q>Hot, Heat,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.)
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Ee ph-aist-os (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), <q>Vulcan,</q> <q>The God of Fire.</q>
</p>

<p>
Aifi, <q>Fire,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Sumbava</hi>,) Fi (<hi rend='italic'>Japan</hi>), and Fei (<hi rend='italic'>Siam</hi>),
<q>Fire,</q> Epee, <q>Fire,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Katabans, North America</hi>,) Peez Pioe,
<q>Fire,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Moxians, South America</hi>,) Ee.ph.c'h, and Ph.ou.c'h,
<q>To blow upon,</q> <q>Kindle,</q> <q>Inflame,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.)
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Phoi-b-os</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), <q>The God of the Sun, Phœbus.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>This word (<q>Phoibos</q>) expresses the brightness and splendour
of that luminary.</q> (Lempriere.)
</p>

<p>
Pha-ō, <q>To Shine,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
Ee.ph.ō, <q>To shine forth,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,) <q>Brightness, Splendour,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Chald.</hi>) Ee.ph.ph.e, <q>Very Beautiful,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
Phōs, <q>Light,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
Fosseye, <q>The Sun,</q> (<hi rend='italic'><q>Sereres</q> Negroes.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
Phōs, <q>A Star,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Japan</hi>.)
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The foregoing are merely examples of the mode in which
the names of the Heathen Deities are susceptible of explanation,
by means of a general comparison of languages. In the
course of this work, the names of nearly all the principal
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
Gods of Egypt, Greece, Italy, and India, will be explained in
the same manner.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The North American Indians are not Idolaters. They
worship a <q>Great</q> and <q>Good Spirit.</q> They also believe in
an <q>Evil Spirit.</q>
</p>

<p>
A large class of Indian dialects have been analysed by Du
Ponceau, a writer whose high philosophical reputation, great
candour, and perfect knowledge of the dialects he examined,
render his researches eminently deserving of attention. In
early youth he was secretary to Court Ghebelin. But though
a native of France, he passed the principal part of his life in
the United States, in the employment of the Government of
that country. His essay on the <q>Algonquyn Dialects of North
America,</q> was elicited from him at a very advanced period of
life by a prize offered in Paris, for which he was the successful
competitor. By means of his familiar acquaintance with the
languages of the Indian Tribes, it is related that he proved a
person, whose narrative at one time excited considerable interest
both in this country and in France to be an impostor;
Hunter, the author of a work professing to give an authentic
account of his captivity among the Indian Tribes. In his
treatise on those languages, though for the most part he declines
to generalize and professes to wish rather to furnish data
for others, Du Ponceau expresses himself nevertheless, decidedly
adverse to the views of those writers who conceive the
Indian Tribes to be descendants of colonists from the Asiatic
continent. The Indians and their languages he views as indigenous
products of the American soil. After alluding in
general terms of respect to the memory of that celebrated
writer, he assails with national vivacity Grotius's conclusion
with respect to the primitive language, which forms the motto
of this work, quoting from Dante a passage in which it is
intimated that the primitive language of Man must have
perished at the <q>General Deluge!</q>
</p>

<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>

<p>
More ample proofs of the connexion of the dialects examined
by Du Ponceau with those of the Old World, occur
hereafter. In this place I must confine myself to one remarkable
example.
</p>

<p>
With reference to the names given by the Indians to the
great object of their worship, Du Ponceau states the result
of his analysis to be that the names of the Supreme Being in
all the Indian dialects he has explored, primarily mean <q>a
Spirit.</q> But there is one instance, he adds, in which he has
not been able to verify this conclusion, viz. in that of the
dialect of the Abenaki tribe. It is true, he remarks, that
<q>Father Raffles</q> had made a statement tending to show that
in this instance there was no exception to the general rule he
(Du Ponceau) had adopted, for, according to Father Raffles,
in the dialect of the Abenaki the name of the Supreme Being
was Ke tsi Niou esk ou, and these words K etsi <q><hi rend='italic'>Ni ou eskou</hi>,</q>
mean the Great <q><hi rend='italic'>Spirit</hi> or Genius;</q> while the name of the
Evil Being was Matsi <q><hi rend='italic'>Nioueskou</hi>,</q> and these terms mean the
Evil <q>Spirit or Genius.</q>
</p>

<p>
But Du Ponceau intimates that he has not been able by
means of his own researches to satisfy himself of the accuracy
of Father Raffles's statement, as to the origin of these words,
and he adds, <q>I do not know whence this word <q>Ni oueskou</q>
comes.</q> (<q>Je ne sais pas d'où vient ce mot Nioueskou.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Among the specimens he has published of words used in
the Iroquois dialects, a class of Indian languages which he
has not minutely analysed, Du Ponceau gives <hi rend='italic'><q>N' iou</q></hi> as the
name of <q>the Deity.</q>
</p>

<p>
Now the following comparison exhibits the remarkable fact
that these words <q><hi rend='italic'>N'iou</hi></q> and <q>Nioueskou</q> may be distinctly
and extensively recognized in the languages of the old world,
in the very sense which, according to Father Raffles, was the
primitive meaning of <q>Nioueskou</q> among the Abenaki tribe
of Indians, viz., in that of <q><hi rend='italic'>a Spirit or Genius</hi>.</q> They also
reappear in physical meanings, which, according to Horne
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
Tooke's principles, may, à priori, be pronounced to be philologically
analogous.
</p>

<p>
The resemblance of the Indian terms to the European and
Asiatic words is as close as the resemblance which exists between
such words of the two latter classes as belong to the
same languages or to the same group of languages. The variation
of inflection between N'ioh and Niou-es kou, may
also be restored; compare No- (the root or unchangeable
part of <q>Noos,</q>) with <q>No-os Nous,</q> <q>The Mind,</q> (in the
nominative case, <hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>.) Compare also <q>Nose,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>,)
with <q>Nas-ika,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew, Indo-European, and American Words applied to the
Physical Senses.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Hebrew.</cell><cell>Ind.-Europ. &amp; American.</cell></row>
<row><cell>N.sh.-b, N.sh.-ph, <q>To
blow.</q></cell><cell>Nos (<hi rend='italic'>Sclavonic</hi>), Nase, &amp;c.
(<hi rend='italic'>German and other Gothic tongues</hi>), Nas-ika (<hi rend='italic'>San.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>N.sh.-m, <q>To breathe out,</q>
N.sh.-m.e, <q>The Breath,</q>
<q>Man as a Breathing
Animal</q>.<note place='foot'>Parkhurst's Hebrew Lexicon.</note></cell><cell>Nas-us,
Nas-um (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)
<q>The Nose,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>N.ph.sh, <q>Breath.</q></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Ee-n.sh.ou.ph, <q>A species of Water-fowl remarkable for its Hard Breathing.</q></cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Applied to Mental and Physical Objects.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>N.sh.-m.e <q>Breath,</q> (as above) <q>Life,</q> <q>Soul,</q> <q>Spirit.</q></cell><cell>No-os, Nou-s, (No.e.No),
<q>The Mind,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)
N'ioh.Nioues-kou, <q>The Genius, Spirit, God,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>North American Indian
Dialects</hi>, as above.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>N.ph.sh. <q>Breath,</q> <q>Life,</q> <q>Mind,</q> <q>A Person or Man,</q> N.ph.sh-ce, The Pronoun <q>I.</q></cell>
<cell>N.ph.sh, or Nouvis, <q>Full
of <hi rend='italic'>Life</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Spirits</hi>,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>

<p>
These examples may be concluded with a very remarkable
instance of an important word which occurs in every one of
the three great divisions of the globe, except America, and is
met with in every one of the three regions of Africa.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Words for <q>Bread.</q></hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Asia</hi>.&mdash;Buro (<hi rend='italic'>Savu Isle, a Malay dialect</hi>.)
</p>

<p><hi rend='italic'>Africa</hi>.&mdash;Bouron (<hi rend='italic'>Fulahs, North Africa</hi>.)</p>
<p>Bourou (<hi rend='italic'>Iolofs, Negro-land</hi>.)</p>
<p>Bra Bre (<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, South Africa</hi>.)</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Europe</hi>.&mdash;Bara (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.) Bro (<hi rend='italic'>Norwegian</hi>.) Bread
(<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>.) Brod or Brot (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
The source of these words seems to be, B.r.e, B.r.ou.th,
<q>Food,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.) In the same language, Lc'h.m, <q>Bread,</q>
primarily means <q>Food, To feed.</q>
</p>

<p>
Combined with the phenomenon of the absolute identity of
the united elements of the languages of the Four Continents,
we encounter a wide, and in many instances a total difference,
when two individual languages are compared. And this is
true not merely of two languages taken from different continents,
but it is true also of languages spoken even in
contiguous regions of the same continent.
</p>

<p>
How then are these singular features of general unity
combined with individual diversity to be reconciled? Of
this problem the investigation will be found in the following
pages.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II.
On The Differences Which Distinguish Individual
Languages Of The Four Continents.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Section I.</hi>
</p>

<p>
These differences may be explained by Causes now in
Operation. The principal causes are, The abandonment by
different branches of the same race:
</p>

<lg>
<l>1, Of different Synonymes;</l>
<l>2, Of different meanings of the same Synonyme.</l>
</lg>

<p>
This Section may be considered as confined to an affirmation
of the propositions above stated.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Section II.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>On the Differences between the Celtic and Gothic Classes of
Languages. The Celtic and Gothic differ almost totally
in the most Common Words. Celtic and Gothic words
identical with Persian Synonymes.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
The Celtic and Gothic Races form the population of North-western
and Central Europe.
</p>

<p>
In those early ages in which the Celtic tribes first
came into collision with the Roman legionaries, the Celtic
language and race occupied a wide section of Europe, including
the British islands, France, the Rhine, the whole of
Switzerland, a portion of South-western Germany, and the
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
North of Italy. The Celts were also in possession of some
of the fairest regions of the Spanish Peninsula, a country
which they shared with Iberian tribes, the ancestors of the
Basque nation, of which a remnant still preserves among the
fastnesses of the Pyrenean mountains the language, character,
and institutions of their warlike forefathers. The existence
in those ages of a Celtic population, occupying territories
thus extensive, and the identity of their languages with the
living tongues still spoken by the Welsh and other Celtic
nations, have been placed beyond all doubt by the luminous
investigations of Dr. Prichard and Humboldt.
</p>

<p>
In the present day, the Gothic nations and languages extend
over a large section of the area of Europe, including the
greatest portion<note place='foot'>Bohemia is inhabited by a Sclavonic race, &amp;c.</note> of Germany, the whole of Sweden, Norway,
and Iceland, the German Cantons of Switzerland, and the
British Isles, with the exception of those districts in which
dialects of the Celtic are spoken.
</p>

<p>
Of the common origin of the Celtic and Gothic tongues
we possess no direct historical proof, for the sources of these
languages reach far higher than the records of history. Nor,
as I conceive, is it possible, from a comparison of these languages
themselves, to elicit a satisfactory demonstration of
their original identity. Instances of partial resemblances
may no doubt be pointed out; but it will be found nevertheless
that in the most common corresponding terms, the Celtic
and Gothic differ almost totally.
</p>

<p>
The only satisfactory mode of proving the common origin
of the Celtic and Gothic seems to be by means of the affinity
to the languages of India, Persia, &amp;c., which are displayed
by both, even in those very features in which they differ most
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
widely from each other. The following are examples of the
union, in the form of Synonymes in the Persian, of corresponding
terms, in which the Celtic and Gothic differ totally
from each other.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2cm} p{2cm} p{2cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Persian.</cell><cell>Welsh.</cell><cell>English.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Made, a maid, a female.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Maid. Mädchen, <hi rend='italic'>Germ.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Geneez, a girl.</cell><cell>Geneth.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>D.ch.t.r., a girl, a daughter.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Daughter. Töchter, <hi rend='italic'>Germ.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Chonahr, a sister.</cell><cell>Idem.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Ch.d. a God.</cell><cell></cell><cell>God.</cell></row>
<row><cell>B.r.ee, God.</cell><cell>Beree or Peree, to create, (spelt Peri.) Beri|adur, Creator. B.r.a. Heb. Id.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Pechegan, infants.</cell><cell>Bechgyn.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Juvan, young.</cell><cell>Ieuange.</cell><cell>Juvenile, from <hi rend='italic'>Lat.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Braud.|r.</cell><cell>Braud (Brathair, <hi rend='italic'>Irish.</hi>)</cell><cell>Brother.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Mam, mother.</cell><cell>Mam.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>M.d.r. mother.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Mother.</cell></row>
<row><cell>P.d.r. father.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Pater, <hi rend='italic'>Lat.</hi>; Fader, <hi rend='italic'>Ang.-Sax.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Latin.</cell><cell>Greek.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Aud.|n. the ear.</cell><cell>Aud|io, I hear.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Koush, the ear.</cell><cell></cell><cell>A|kous|o, I will hear. Akoustics, <hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>F.m. the mouth.</cell><cell>(Fhuaim, a voice, <hi rend='italic'>Irish.</hi>) Fama, Fame, <hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>.</cell><cell>Feem|ee, I speak.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
The Persian grammar also combines many European
languages:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.5cm} p{1.5cm} p{1.5cm} p{1.5cm} p{1.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(10) lw(10) lw(10) lw(10) lw(10)'">
<row><cell>Persian.</cell><cell>Welsh.</cell><cell>English.</cell><cell>Latin.</cell><cell>German.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Men, I.</cell><cell>My.</cell><cell>Mine.</cell><cell>Meus.</cell><cell>Mein.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Tou, thou.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Thou.</cell><cell>Tu.</cell><cell>Du.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Av, he, she, or it.</cell><cell>Idem, spelt Ev.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>A een, this.</cell><cell>Hyn.; Hon.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Bod|n|, to be; (n. infinitive affix.)</cell><cell>Bod.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Am, I am.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Idem.</cell><cell></cell><cell>(Eim|i, <hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>.)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
This tense is very like Latin:
</p>

<p>
Shou, be thou.<lb/>
Shou d (sit), let him be.<lb/>
Shou eem (simus), let us be.<lb/>
Shou eet (sitis), be ye.<lb/>
Shou nd, let them be.<note place='foot'>This comparison has been extracted from the Cambrian Quarterly Magazine,
vol. II., p. 183, in which it was originally published by the author of this work.</note>
</p>

<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Section III.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>On the Changes which have taken place in the English Language.
Effect of the Norman Conquest, as a Cause of
these Changes exaggerated. Dr. Johnson's Opinion. Sir
Walter Scott's. Speech of <q>Wamba</q> in Ivanhoe. Some
of the most important Changes have occurred since the time
of Chaucer. The modern English, the Provincial Dialects
of Lancashire and other English Counties, and the Lowland
Scotch, different Fragments of the Anglo-Saxon. The
Provincial English Auxiliary Verb, <q>I Bin,</q> &amp;c.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
That extensive changes have taken place in many Human
languages, within a comparatively limited period, is a truth
of which the proofs are alike abundant and indisputable. The
various dialects that sprang from the Latin after the downfall
of the Roman Empire, the emanation of numerous dialects
in the Scandinavian Kingdoms from one ancient tongue,
<q>The Danska Tunge</q> or <q>Norse,</q> and finally the successive
phases of transition through which the English language
itself has passed since the period of the Norman
conquest, conspire, with other examples of the same kind, at
once to establish the occurrence of such changes, and to exhibit
in a striking point of view their extraordinary variety
and extent.
</p>

<p>
In order to account for differences, so characteristic and
apparently so fundamental, as many of the languages which
are the offspring of these changes display, it has generally been
deemed necessary to ascribe them to the agency of a <emph>violent
disturbing cause</emph>. Hence the origin of an opinion that may
be regarded as the prevalent one, viz. that these varieties of
dialect have been mainly produced by the influence of Foreign
invasions and conquests, and the consequent admixture of
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
the Languages of the dominant, with those of vanquished,
nations.
</p>

<p>
The grounds of this conclusion may be appropriately tested&mdash;and
its fallacy, as I conceive, satisfactorily established&mdash;in
one single instance, which I have been naturally led to select
as involving considerations of peculiar interest to English
readers. I allude to the influence which the Norman conquest
of England is supposed to have exercised, in the production
of those peculiar features, which distinguish the
modern language of England from the original Anglo-Saxon
tongue.
</p>

<p>
The share which the Norman conquest may have had in
the formation of those peculiarities may be best determined
by investigating 1st the immediate, and 2d the remote,
consequences of that event.
</p>

<p>
On the subject of the immediate effects of the Norman
conquest, it is highly interesting to observe that Dr. Johnson
thus expresses himself in the following remarkable passage:
</p>

<p>
<q>About the year 1150 the Saxon began to take a form in
which the beginning of the present English may be plainly
discovered; this change seems not to have been the effect
of the Norman conquest, for very <emph>few French words</emph> are
found to have been introduced in the first Hundred years
after it; the language must, therefore, have been altered by
<emph>causes like those which, notwithstanding the care of writers
and societies instituted to obviate them, are even now daily
making innovations in every living language</emph>. I have exhibited
a specimen of the language of this age from the
year 1135 to 1140 of the Saxon Chronicle, of which the
latter part was apparently written near the time to which
it relates.</q><note place='foot'>History of the English language, prefixed to Dr. Johnson's Dictionary.</note>
</p>

<p>
Yet Professor Rask of Copenhagen, a writer of great learning
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
and ability, in alluding to the changes that occurred at
this period, attempts to account for them by vaguely attributing
them to an infusion of the speech of the <q>old northern
settlers,</q> (in other words&mdash;the Danes,) and to the ascendancy
of the Norman French as a court language.<note place='foot'>Rask's Anglo-Saxon Grammar, by Thorpe. Preface, p. xlvii.</note> But the facts
are singularly at variance with his conclusions! The sway
of the Danish kings had produced, as he admits, no material
alteration in the English language, even during its continuance;
and how then could it have done so a century after
its termination? Nor can the ascendancy of the Norman
Court be accepted as a satisfactory explanation of these results,
since the changes to be accounted for did not consist in the
adoption of Norman words, but in an internal change in the
structure and inflections of the original Anglo-Saxon itself,
unattended by the introduction of any Foreign admixture.
</p>

<p>
It is obvious, then, that the conclusion of Professor Rask
cannot be regarded as a deduction naturally suggested by
the phenomena, with which he was so profoundly conversant,
but must be viewed rather as a result of the influence which
the popular and generally received opinions on the subject,
must have exercised upon his mind. Highly instructive is
it to mark in this instance an example of the extent to which
even erudite and admirable philologists have frequently been
betrayed into inconsistency and error, by the supposed necessity
of referring the revolutions which languages have
undergone, to some abrupt and violent social revolution, with
which, being connected in the order of events, they are also
and not unnaturally conceived to be equally connected by
the relation of cause and effect!
</p>

<p>
It may be assumed therefore, agreeably to the views of
Dr. Johnson, that the Norman conquest had no <emph>immediate</emph>
effect on the language of the Anglo-Saxons. It remains then
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
to inquire in what manner the influence of that event was
felt at a more distant period, viz.: about a century afterwards,
during the reigns of John and Richard Cœur de Lion,
the period during which the intermingling of the Norman
and Saxon races and tongues is believed to have been consummated.
During this period also, we possess the guidance
of a great master, who has embodied all the philosophy of
this subject in a few pathetic words which he has put into
the mouth of a jester.<note place='foot'>Mr. Lockhart has given an interesting account of the origin of Sir Walter
Scott's views on this subject as expressed in the passages quoted above. They
were first suggested by a friend whose attention had been much directed to subjects
of this nature.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>Truly,</q> said Wamba, without stirring from the spot,
<q>I have consulted my legs upon this matter, and they are
altogether of opinion, that to carry my gay garments
through these sloughs would be an act of unfriendship to
my sovereign person and royal wardrobe; wherefore Gurth,
I advise thee to call off Fangs, and leave the herd to their
destiny, which, whether they meet with bands of travelling
soldiers, or of outlaws, or of wandering pilgrims, can be
little else than to be converted into Normans before morning
to thy no small ease and comfort.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The swine turned Normans to my comfort,</q> quoth
Gurth; <q>expound that to me, Wamba, for my brain is too
dull, and my mind too vexed, to read riddles.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, how call you those grunting brutes running about
on their four legs?</q> demanded Wamba.
</p>

<p>
<q>Swine, fool, swine,</q> said the herd; <q>every fool knows
that.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And swine is good Saxon,</q> said the Jester; <q>but how
call you the sow when she is flayed, and drawn, and
quartered, and hung by the heels, like a traitor?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Pork,</q> answered the swineherd.
</p>

<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>

<p>
<q>I am very glad every fool knows that too,</q> said Wamba,
<q>and Pork, I think, is good Norman-French; and so when
the brute lives, and is in the charge of a Saxon slave, she
goes by her Saxon name; but becomes a Norman, and is
called Pork, when she is carried to the Castle-hall to feast
among the nobles. What dost thou think of this, friend
Gurth, ha?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is but too true doctrine, friend Wamba, however it got
into thy fool's pate!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nay, I can tell you more,</q> said Wamba, in the same
tone. <q>There is old Alderman Ox continues to hold his
Saxon epithet, while he is under the charge of serfs and
bondmen such as thou, but becomes Beef, a fiery French
gallant, when he arrives before the worshipful jaws that
are destined to consume him. <q>Mynheer Calf,</q> too, becomes
<q>Monsieur de Veau,</q> in the like manner: he is
Saxon when he requires tendance, and takes a Norman
name when he becomes matter of enjoyment.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>By St. Dunstan,</q> answered Gurth, <q>thou speakest but
sad truths; little is left to us but the air we breathe, and
that appears to have been reserved with much hesitation,
solely for the purpose of enabling us to endure the tasks
they lay upon our shoulders. The finest and the fattest is
for their board; the loveliest is for their couch; the best
and bravest supply their foreign masters with soldiers, and
whiten distant lands with their bones, leaving few here who
have either the will or the power to protect the unfortunate
Saxon!</q>
</p>

<p>
The effect of the Norman Conquest was simply to introduce
among the Saxon population a certain class of new
terms, which&mdash;though they were eventually embodied in their
language&mdash;are still readily distinguishable from the Stock on
which they were thus engrafted. But the general structure
and composition of the language remained unaffected by any
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
Foreign alloy. The most common verbs, nouns, and grammatical
inflections and forms&mdash;Horne Tooke's <q>epea pteroenta</q>
of the English language&mdash;remained, and have since
continued to be, pure, unadulterated Anglo-Saxon!
</p>

<p>
Such was the character of those modifications in the
English Tongue that flowed from the Norman Conquest.
Partial and peculiar were those changes in their nature&mdash;brief,
also, was the interval of which they were the result!
A period can be fixed, at which it is certain that the dialect of
the Norman had ceased to encroach on that of the Anglo-Saxon
people. In the age of Chaucer, for example, the Norman and
Saxon races had long become undistinguishable, and the languages
they spoke had blended into one. Can the same age
be fixed upon as an epoch at which the process of transition
in the English language had also been arrested? That considerable
changes have since occurred will not be disputed&mdash;for
it is an historical fact which does neither admit of doubt
nor discussion. But had all <emph>important</emph> changes ceased at that
time? Can it be said that&mdash;in the time of Chaucer&mdash;that
progressive revolution which has so widely separated the
modern English from the original Anglo-Saxon had gone
through all its stages? Can it be said that the innovations
which have since occurred are few in number, and trifling in
point of character, compared to those which belong to earlier
periods of our History?
</p>

<p>
The answer to these inquiries involves a truth that I
believe will be found no less startling to the Philologist than
to the general reader, in whose mind the changes which the
English language has undergone are associated with the
violent shock given by the Norman Conquest to Anglo-Saxon
institutions. The truth to which I allude&mdash;and it is one for
which I apprehend few inquirers will be prepared&mdash;is this:
that the changes which have occurred in the English language
since the age of Chaucer are at least equal in importance to
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
those which took place in the antecedent periods of our
history. Novel as this conclusion may appear, the proofs
are so simple and so conclusive, as to place its accuracy
beyond the possibility of doubt.
</p>

<p>
The features which distinguish different languages from
each other are divisible into two classes&mdash;Words and Grammatical
inflections. In both these features marked differences
have arisen between our modern English and its parent
Saxon, and to both these classes we must refer in forming
our conclusion as to the relative importance of the alterations
which have taken place in our language at two different epochs.
</p>

<p>
1st. The difference in words between the language of
Chaucer and our modern English will be sufficiently obvious,
from a cursory glance at the venerable remains of that
poet. How many terms are there in the pages of the father
of English poetry that require the aid of a glossary to render
them intelligible even to an educated Englishman! These
terms too, be it observed&mdash;and it is a reflection highly deserving
of the attention of those who may still cling to the
impression that the Norman Conquest has been the sole
agent of those phases through which the English Tongue has
passed&mdash;do not consist exclusively of Anglo-Saxon roots, but
comprise also a large number of Norman words which have
shared the same fate!
</p>

<p>
2d. Still more striking have been those Changes in the
Grammatical forms of the English which may be referred
to the last four centuries.
</p>

<p>
The ancient Saxon was a language of inflections&mdash;the
modern English is a language of simple forms. Thus, in the
Anglo-Saxon the terminations of the Verb were varied in different
Persons, as they are in the Latin <q>Hab-<hi rend='italic'>eo</hi>, Hab-<hi rend='italic'>emus</hi>,
Hab-<hi rend='italic'>ent</hi>,</q> and in the German <q>Hab-<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>, Hab-<hi rend='italic'>en</hi>, Hab-<hi rend='italic'>en</hi>.</q>
These inflections have, for the most part, progressively disappeared
from the English, which expresses the changes of
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
Persons by separate Pronouns, in conjunction with a Root, in
most instances unvarying, as <q>I <hi rend='italic'>Have</hi>, We <hi rend='italic'>Have</hi>, They <hi rend='italic'>Have</hi>.</q>
There is distinct evidence that this change has, in a great
measure, perhaps principally, taken place since the time of
Chaucer&mdash;whose writings, to a great extent, preserve the
Anglo-Saxon inflections, such as <q>They Hav-<hi rend='italic'>en</hi>,</q><note place='foot'>This inflection, as in <q>They Hav-<hi rend='italic'>en</hi>,</q> is also preserved in the Dialects of the
English Provinces.</note> &amp;c., corresponding
with the German <q>Sie Hab-<hi rend='italic'>en</hi>,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Slow and almost imperceptible have been the steps in this
as in other examples of that revolution of which the progress
may be faintly traced in the writings of Spenser, and
Shakspeare, and Milton, and even in those of the great
modern Masters of the last century. In our <emph>own</emph> generation
it has not been consummated! A striking instance occurs
in the old inflection of the third person singular <q>He Giv-<hi rend='italic'>eth</hi>,</q>
still partially used in the venerable forms of Scripture. This
inflection, now fast passing into oblivion, trifling as it may
appear, forms a link which serves to associate the English
language not only with the German, but with the Latin and
the Sanscrit!<note place='foot'><p>
Giv-eth (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>)<lb/>
Gieb-et (<hi rend='italic'>Germ.</hi>)<lb/>
Don-at (<hi rend='italic'>Lat.</hi>)<lb/>
Can-ati (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) i.e. Can-it (<hi rend='italic'>Lat.</hi>)<lb/>
Diy-ati (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) i.e. Die-th (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>)
</p></note>
</p>

<p>
The Auxiliary Verb may probably be regarded as the most
important part of Language. Now it is highly deserving of
remark, that in the Anglo-Saxon there existed an Auxiliary
Verb, <q>Beo, or Beonne, To Be,</q> which has been abandoned
in the modern English. This Verb is interesting, not merely
from its important functions as a part of Language, but also
from its forming a link, as will hereafter appear, between the
Anglo-Saxon, the German, the dialects of the English Provinces,
and of the Scottish Lowlands. From the English of
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
Literature it has been lost since the days of Chaucer, by
whom it is commonly used, as in the following example:
</p>

<p>
<q>These two sinnes <hi rend='italic'>bin</hi> so nigh cosins.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Person's Tale.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The peculiarities which distinguish the dialects of the
English Counties from the language of the higher classes of
society are not, as is perhaps generally supposed, the results
of the capricious deviation of uncultivated minds from an
established standard. On the contrary, they appear clearly
for the most part to be various relics or Fragments of Old
English or Anglo-Saxon, which the more educated classes
have lost. For example, To <q>axe</q> (for To ask,) <q>I conne,</q>
(I can,) expressions used by the peasantry of Shropshire, are
words of Saxon origin that occur in Chaucer. In an able
work on the peculiarities of the dialect of Lancashire, by
Mr. Collier,<note place='foot'>A work published by this gentleman under the quaint title of <q>Tim Bobbin,</q>
and written entirely in the Lancashire Dialect, is well known. His writings, however,
display the attainments of a scholar.</note> it has been shown with much learning and research
that those peculiarities are to be recognized in Chaucer,
Spenser, Ben Jonson, and other old English writers. Obsolete
Norman, as well as Saxon, words occur in this dialect.
Similar inferences with regard to the Lowland Scotch may
be drawn from Mr. Jamieson's work on that branch of the
Anglo-Saxon.
</p>

<p>
Some very interesting results will be found to flow from a
Comparison of the <q><emph>Pronunciation</emph></q> of different English
Counties, and of the Lowland Scotch, with that of the educated
classes of modern England. One of the most marked
differences between the modern English and the German
consists in the superior <emph>breadth</emph> or <emph>distinctness</emph> which is given
in the German to words which are uttered with a comparatively
<emph>narrow</emph> and <emph>indistinct</emph> sound in Modern English. There
is every reason to believe that the Anglo-Saxon Pronunciation
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
was similar to the German, and that the present English
mode has been the result of progressive innovation. Of the
various dialects of the Anglo-Saxon, the Lowland Scotch, in
its pronunciation, as well as in individual words, approaches
nearest to the Continental German.<note place='foot'><q><hi rend='italic'>Gang to the recht (right) hand</hi></q> was a reply which Dr. Lappenberg of
Hamburgh has noticed to the author as one which struck his ear when he visited
Scotland for the first time as a student. The approximation to the German is
manifest.</note> But, as intimated
above, many of the characteristics of German articulation
have been preserved also in the Provincial dialects of England.
Moreover, it is interesting to observe, that <emph>different</emph> primitive
peculiarities have been preserved in <emph>different</emph> counties. For
example, the English of the educated classes differs from the
Continental German, and, as it is believed, from the Anglo-Saxon
also,<note place='foot'>Rask, by Thorpe, pp. 8-9.</note> in giving a <emph>narrow</emph> sound to the vowels A and U.
Now the Shropshire dialect has preserved the broad A;
(<q>Hair,</q> for instance, is pronounced <q><hi rend='italic'>H-ā-r,</hi></q> as it is by the
Germans!) On the other hand, in Lancashire and Cheshire
the broad U forms the prominent feature in the dialect of the
peasantry; (for example, <q>Butter</q> and <q>Gutter</q> are pronounced
<q><hi rend='italic'>Bootter</hi></q> and <q><hi rend='italic'>Gootter</hi>!</q>)
</p>

<p>
As already noticed, the Anglo-Saxon Auxiliary Verb forms
in numerous instances an important connecting link. Thus
the modern English and the modern German Auxiliary Verbs
differ totally in the present tense.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>English.</cell><cell>German.</cell></row>
<row><cell>I am,</cell><cell>Ich bin,</cell></row>
<row><cell>Thou art,</cell><cell>Du bist,</cell></row>
<row><cell>He is.</cell><cell>Er ist.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>We are,</cell><cell>Wir sind,</cell></row>
<row><cell>You are,</cell><cell>Ihr seyd,</cell></row>
<row><cell>They are.</cell><cell>Sie sind.</cell></row>
</table>


<p>
But both these Verbs co-exist in the present tense in the
old Anglo-Saxon.
</p>

<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Anglo-Saxon</hi><note place='foot'>This Verb also exhibits the German Plural <q>Sind,</q> which differs from the
singular altogether, and belonged no doubt originally to a distinct Auxiliary Verb.</note> Verb the source of the English <q>I am,</q> and
Anglo-Saxon Verb corresponding
with the German <q>Ich bin.</q>
</p>

<p>
Indicative Present.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Singular.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1, Eom; 1, Beo,</l>
<l>2, Eort; 2, Byst,</l>
<l>3, Is.; 3, By &amp; Byd.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Plural.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1, 2, 3, Synd.; 1, 2, 3, Beod &amp; Beo.
</p>

<p>
Subjunctive Present.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Singular.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1, 2, 3, Sy (Seo); 1, 2, 3, Beo.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Plural.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1, 2, 3, Sy'n; 1, 2, 3, Beon.
</p>

<p>
Indicative Imperfect.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Singular.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1, Wæs; 1, 2, 3, Beo.</l>
<l>2, Wære,</l>
<l>3, Wæs.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Plural.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1, 2, 3, Weron; 1, 2, 3, Beod.
</p>

<p>
Infinitive Present.
</p>

<p>
Wesanne; Beonne.
</p>

<p>
Participle Active.
</p>

<p>
Wesende; Beonde.
</p>

<p>
Participle Past.
</p>

<p>
Gewesen.
</p>

<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>

<p>
But though the present tense of the Verb <q>Beo</q> or <q>Beonne</q>
does not exist in modern English, it has been preserved in a
remarkable manner in the Shropshire and other dialects, in
which it runs thus:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Provincial English.</cell><cell>German.</cell></row>
<row><cell>I Be, or I Bin,</cell><cell>Ich Bin,</cell></row>
<row><cell>Thou Bist,</cell><cell>Du Bist,</cell></row>
<row><cell>He Is.</cell><cell>Er Ist.</cell></row>
<row><cell>We Bin,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Yō Bin,</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>They Bin.</cell><cell></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
The word <q>Bin</q> or <q>Ben</q> is used by Chaucer for the 1st,
2d, and 3d Persons Plural,<note place='foot'>See Glossary to Tyrwhitt's Chaucer.</note> as in the passage previously
quoted: <q>These two sinnes <hi rend='italic'>bin</hi> so nigh cosins.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Person's
Tales.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
These are singular but highly instructive examples of the
caprices of <q>the great Innovator!</q>
</p>

<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Section IV.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>On the Scandinavian Languages. Resemblances between the
Icelandic and Anglo-Saxon. Recent Origin and extensive
Nature of the Differences among the Icelandic, Swedish,
Danish, and Norwegian Tongues. Approximation of the
Ancient Specimens of the Scandinavian and Teutonic
Languages.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
The Island of Iceland abounds in diversified features of
interest; and its Language, early History, and Institutions,
will be found replete with instruction, in connexion with the
inquiry pursued in this volume.
</p>

<p>
As has been previously stated, the Gothic Class of languages
are naturally divisible into two great subordinate
branches: the Teutonic or German, including the dialects of
Germany, the Low Countries, and of Great Britain&mdash;and the
Scandinavian, including those of the two Scandinavian
Peninsulas and Iceland. These two great Divisions of the
Languages of the Gothic race are radically the same, but
they are supposed to display certain specific differences by
which they are distinguished from each other.
</p>

<p>
Of the Teutonic&mdash;one of the most venerable specimens is
the Anglo-Saxon, the primitive tongue of the Ancestors of
the modern English. More ancient specimens of some of
the other Gothic dialects have been preserved, but as these
are for the most part mere fragments&mdash;while of the Anglo-Saxon
literature and language we possess copious Remains&mdash;it
has been inferred by eminent Scholars that it is in these
Remains&mdash;to Englishmen so interesting for other reasons&mdash;that
we may on the whole, perhaps, hope to find the nearest
approach to a transcript of the early language of the Teutonic
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
tribes.<note place='foot'>Rask's Anglo-Saxon Grammar.</note> Of all the Scandinavian Languages, on the other
hand, the Icelandic&mdash;by the general concurrence of the
scholars of the North&mdash;appears to be the most primitive.
</p>

<p>
Now in relation to these two Languages, a very interesting
proposition has been established by Scandinavian scholars&mdash;and
though they widely differ as to the cause of the results
they discuss&mdash;they seem to be agreed with respect to the
proposition itself. The Icelandic, they have shown, closely
approaches to the Anglo-Saxon in numerous features in
which it differs from the languages of Norway, Sweden, and
Denmark. Moreover it has been pointed out by the writers
who first noticed these resemblances, that&mdash;in their Literary
and Bardic Institutions, as well as in their Language&mdash;the
Icelanders approach to the Anglo-Saxons. In explanation
of these facts, they propose the theory&mdash;that in the early
ages of their history the Icelanders must have benefited
by direct communication and instruction from the Anglo-Saxons.
</p>

<p>
These views have been fully discussed by Professor Rask,
in a Preface prefixed to his Anglo-Saxon Grammar, which
contains a valuable body of facts that serve to throw a new
light on the history of the Scandinavian Tongues.<note place='foot'>Rask's Grammar, by Thorpe.</note> He does
not deny the existence of these important common features
in the Icelandic and Anglo-Saxon Languages and Remains;
nor the absence of the same features as regards the Modern
specimens of the Danish, Swedish, and Norwegian; but he
maintains, nevertheless, that all these characteristics may be
retraced in detail, either in the Ancient or in the Provincial
specimens of those three Languages. In the present day
the Icelandic differs widely from the Languages of the
Mainland of Scandinavia, and those Languages also differ
widely among themselves. But originally, he maintains, one
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
common Speech, the ancient Scandinavian, (<q>Danska Tunge,</q>)
was spoken from the coasts of Greenland to those of Finland,
from the Frozen Ocean to the Eider.<note place='foot'>Bosworth's Scandinavian Literature.</note> As we ascend into
the remoter periods of history we find the languages of
Scandinavia gradually approximate to each other, and finally
blend into one.<note place='foot'>Ib. See Rask's Anglo-Saxon Grammar, by Thorpe.</note> During the ninth century, and the period
immediately succeeding, these tongues were perfectly identical.
</p>

<p>
Professor Rask's proofs of this proposition may be said to
consist of a reunion of the <q>Disjecta Membra</q> of the
<q>Danska Tunge,</q> as found dispersed in the various kingdoms
and provinces of the Scandinavian Mainland. Of these
proofs I shall offer a few examples.
</p>

<p>
After observing that the Danish and Norwegian have from
various causes become very much alike, he adds that a comparison
of the Danish with the Swedish would, for that
reason, be more instructive.
</p>

<p>
<q>The Swedish has almost from the introduction of Christianity,
even during the Calmar union, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1397, and in
the time of Gustavus I., been a distinct tongue; a comparison,
therefore, with the Swedish is more to the present
purpose.</q>
</p>

<p>
He then gives a specimen of an ancient Danish MS. of a
date prior to the Reformation, which, <q>like all MSS. prior</q>
to that event, <q>differs widely from the present Danish.... It
has many <emph>inflections now obsolete</emph>, but which are to be
found only in Old Swedish and <hi rend='italic'>Icelandic</hi>; many antiquated
<emph>words</emph> and phrases, exempli gratia, then annin,</q> Icelandic
<q>thann annan.</q>
</p>

<p>
He then mentions some words contained in this MS. which
are still preserved in <q>the <emph>provinces</emph> of <hi rend='italic'>Upland, Jutland, and
Dalecarlia.</hi></q>
</p>

<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>

<p>
He next notices an old Swedish document issued by King
Magnus Smik, of which he observes: <q>This, although about a
century older, greatly resembles the preceding specimen,
and is scarcely distinguishable from the Danish of the same
period.... But if we go further back to the language
of the old Danish Laws, we there recognize nearly the
<emph>entire structure</emph> of the earliest Swedish, and the Icelandic
though not always strictly adhered to, as the language in
those unhappy and turbulent times which preceded the
Calmar Union, underwent in Denmark what may be termed
its <emph>fermentation</emph>, somewhat earlier than in the other states.</q>
</p>

<p>
He then gives a specimen from the Ecclesiastical Laws of
Zealand, of which he observes: <q rend='pre'>The few deviations from
the Icelandic bear, for the most part, <emph>a strong resemblance
to the Swedish</emph>.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But the oldest remains of the Danish language are to be
found on our Runic stone monuments, and here at length
it perfectly coincides with the earliest Swedish, Norwegian,
and Icelandic.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<q>The Danish is closely allied to the Swedish, and both, in
the earliest times, lapse into the Icelandic, which, according
to all ancient records, was formerly universal over all the
North, and must therefore be considered as the parent of
both the modern Scandinavian dialects.</q><note place='foot'>The original identity of all these Languages may be said to be clearly proved;
the Icelandic, also, seems to have deviated less than the rest from the parent
tongue. But this opinion that the Icelandic has not changed at all is a highly
unreasonable one. For example, the Danish and Swedish names for <q>Water</q>,
of which the antiquity is certain from their general use among the
Teutonic tribes, &amp;c. must have been lost by the Icelanders.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the subject of the differences of dialect in the different
<emph>provinces</emph> of the Northern Kingdoms he says that, <q>In Norway
as well as in Denmark one province terminates its verbs
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
in <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, another distinguishes all <emph>the three genders</emph>, while a
third has preserved a vast number of <emph>old</emph> <hi rend='smallcaps'>words</hi> <emph>and inflections</emph>
which to the others <emph>are unintelligible</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
We have thus a proof that even in the provinces of the
same kingdom there are differences of <q><emph>words</emph>, grammar,
<emph>and inflections</emph>.</q> The difference <emph>in the number</emph> of <emph>genders</emph> is
a very remarkable one.
</p>

<p>
The researches of Professor Rask will be found distinctly
to warrant the following conclusions. These conclusions are
in the nature of results that legitimately flow from his researches;
they do not represent the inferences which he himself
has thence deduced. With regard both to the languages
of England and of his native Scandinavia, this learned writer
seems evidently to have been perplexed by the extent and
variety of the changes he has described. Hence, in both instances,
he has shown an inclination to ascribe to the influence
of War and Social disturbance changes which his own researches
clearly prove to have been the effects neither of
transient nor of local influences, but of causes progressively
at work through a series of ages, and embracing large groups
of nations and languages in their action.
</p>

<p>
1. The differences which now exist between the various
Scandinavian Languages extend to all those features in which
it is possible that one Language, or one Class of Languages,
can differ from another; viz. to Words, Grammar, <emph>Inflections,</emph><note place='foot'>As to Grammar and Inflections, see especially pp. xvii. and xix. xxi. xxiii.&mdash;Rask.</note>
and to the <emph>arrangement</emph> of Words in sentences,<note place='foot'>See Bosworth's <q>Scandinavian Literature,</q> as to the difference in the
arrangement of sentences, and the difference of Idioms between the ancient and
modern Scandinavian dialects.</note> or
<emph>Idioms</emph>.
</p>

<p>
2. Not only do differences of this nature present themselves
in the various Scandinavian <emph>Kingdoms</emph>&mdash;but also in the various
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
Provinces of the same <emph>Kingdom</emph>, which in many instances
are distinguished by the most marked differences in
Words, Grammar, &amp;c. Thus the Dialect of Dalecarlia in
Sweden is very ancient and distinct, and approaches to the
Gothic.<note place='foot'>Rask, pp. xvii. and xix. Bosworth's Scandinavian Literature.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. These characteristic features of the various languages
and dialects of Scandinavia have arisen progressively during
the course of ages.
</p>

<p>
4. These differences principally consist in the abandonment
in one Kingdom or Province of a portion of the Words,
Idioms, Grammar, &amp;c. of the Parent Speech&mdash;that part of
the elements of the Original Tongue which have become obsolete
in one dialect having generally been preserved in the
dialects of other kingdoms and provinces&mdash;which have at
the same time generally lost other distinct portions of the
Vocabulary, Grammar, &amp;c. of their common Original. In
other words, the <q>Disjecta Membra</q> of the old Scandinavian,
or <q><hi rend='italic'>Danska Tunge,</hi></q> when not preserved in the Danish, have
been retained for the most part in the Swedish, Icelandic,
and Norwegian, or in some of the Provincial dialects of
Scandinavia, and vice versâ. <emph>In the various provinces in which
it was once spoken different portions of the Parent speech have
been abandoned or preserved.</emph>
</p>

<p>
5. Hence it follows that the Primitive Language of Scandinavia,
or <q>Danska Tunge,</q> does not exist in any one&mdash;but
is dispersed in <hi rend='smallcaps'>all</hi> its derivative dialects. (Compare
the motto from Grotius on the title-page.)
</p>

<p>
6. It is a necessary consequence of the third and fourth
propositions that the more ancient remains of the derivative
dialects approach more nearly to the Parent Speech, and&mdash;in
the ratio of their superior antiquity&mdash;unite a greater proportion
of the distinctive peculiarities of all the sister-dialects,
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
which, as previously stated, have arisen in consequence of
certain portions of the Parent speech having been abandoned
in some provinces and retained in others, and vice versâ.
</p>

<p>
An interesting illustration of this maxim occurs in a passage
from Professor Rask's preface already quoted, in which,
after giving a specimen of old Danish, which approaches
closely to the Icelandic, he adds, <q>The few deviations from
the Icelandic bear for the most part <emph>a strong resemblance</emph> to
the <hi rend='italic'>Swedish</hi>.</q> In other words, the older specimens of the
Danish <emph>unite</emph> those peculiarities by which the modern collateral
Tongues of Iceland, Denmark, and Sweden are distinguished
from each other.
</p>

<p>
Let it be borne in mind, that the lapse of one thousand
years has produced these changes, and the instructive nature
of this example will be fully apparent. Of the accuracy of
the data on which the previous deductions rest, all doubt
must be removed by reference to one remarkable event. It
is historically certain that the Island of Iceland is inhabited
by a nation descended from emigrants from the opposite
Norwegian coast. It is historically certain, also, that previously
to the Ninth Century these warlike adventurers had
not established themselves on the Icelandic soil. Anterior to
that period, therefore, it is self-evident that, inasmuch as the
Icelanders had no existence as a nation, the Icelandic Tongue
could not have had a separate existence as a language. Yet
it is certain that in the present day the Icelandic deviates at
least as widely from the language of the adjoining Norwegian
Coasts as that language deviates from the other Scandinavian
Tongues.
</p>

<p>
The evidence furnished by Professor Rask and the writers
whose views he has combated, will be found, when fairly
balanced, distinctly to support a very important Conclusion,
contemplated by neither. The facts adduced on both sides
conspire to show a rapid approximation of the Teutonic and
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
Scandinavian branches of the Gothic as we ascend into remote
ages.
</p>

<p>
Of this approximation, the features of identity between the
Anglo-Saxon and the Icelandic, pointed out by the writers
whose views Professor Rask combats, furnish a reasonable
presumption, which is converted into positive proof by
the evidence collected by Professor Rask himself, that the
same features occur in all the ancient, though they do not
in the modern, specimens of the Languages of the Scandinavian
Peninsulas. It is true, this learned writer, of whose
researches I have chiefly availed myself in this Section,
maintains that there are some features in which all the
Scandinavian differ from the Anglo-Saxon and other Teutonic
Dialects, a conclusion, however, but feebly supported by the
examples he has adduced, and scarcely reconcilable in any
way with the resemblance which the primitive Swedish
dialect of Dalecarlia is said to bear to the Gothic. But, assuming
the occurrence of some features of difference, even in
the earliest specimens we possess, this assumption leaves untouched
the proposition that these specimens show a rapid
rate of approximation, which, if equally rapid prior to their
date, implies that at an era not many ages anterior the identity
of the languages of Germany and Scandinavia must
have been complete.
</p>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Section V.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>The Origin of the Irish Nation. The original Language of
the British Isles was a Union of Welsh and Irish. Union
of the Irish, Welsh, &amp;c. in the ancient Local Names in the
Celtic Countries of Gaul, &amp;c. These Names a connecting
Link between the existing Celtic Dialects and the Oriental,
Greek, and other Languages, &amp;c.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
The origin of the Irish nation, or Gael, forms&mdash;for numerous
reasons&mdash;a highly interesting and important subject
of inquiry. Of this Nation the very same theories have been
maintained as those which have been adopted in some quarters
with respect to the North American Indians, the Negroes,
and other branches of the Human Family; viz., that they
are of a stock aboriginally inferior and distinct, by nature
incapable of the virtues of civilization. Let the views advocated
by Pinkerton with respect to the Gaelic race&mdash;views
received with no slight degree of favour in his time&mdash;be compared
with the doctrines of many modern writers on the
subject of the native African and American Races, and an
instructive lesson will be learnt on the force of prejudice and
the uniformity of error!
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, it must be allowed that the opinions
which have been generally espoused on the subject of the
origin of the Gael by many of the Historians and Scholars
of Ireland and of the Highlands of Scotland, can scarcely be
said to possess a better claim to the approbation of a calm
and dispassionate judgment. Eminently distinguished as
the Irish are by Literary genius, there is probably no subject
on which their native talent has appeared to less advantage
than in the investigation of the early History of their own
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
Country. Fictions the most extravagant, borrowed from the
Chronicles of the dark ages, have been credulously adopted
by their first Scholars in lieu of those solid truths to which
a calm and sober inquiry alone can lead. Thus we find Mr.
Moore, at once the Poet and the Historian of Ireland,
lending the sanction of his name to the Fable that the Irish
are of Spanish origin; and citing, in answer to the more reasonable
hypothesis of a British origin, a variety of Irish
writers of no mean note, and some Welsh writers also, in
favour of the assertions: 1, that the Irish Language is almost
totally unlike the Welsh or Ancient British; and 2, that the
Welsh is not a Celtic but a Gothic Tongue! There is every
reason to conclude that Mr. Moore&mdash;unacquainted, probably,
with any of the Celtic dialects himself&mdash;resorted to those
authorities which he might naturally have deemed most deserving
of confidence. But this only renders more lamentably
conspicuous the credulity, carelessness, and ignorance of
those to whose labours he has appealed. The assertions,
1, that the Welsh and Irish are unlike; and 2, that the
Welsh is a Gothic dialect, are contradictions of the plainest
facts.
</p>

<p>
Influenced by national feelings Gaelic Scholars have also
advanced various other theories, calculated to exhibit the antiquity
of their language and race in a favorable point of
view. The Gaelic has been maintained to be the Parent, at
least in part, of the Latin, the Welsh, &amp;c.; while to the first
Colonists of Ireland a Carthaginian or Phœnician origin has
been assigned.
</p>

<p>
These conclusions cannot be sustained. But it is highly
probable, notwithstanding, that the proofs on which they
have been based will be found, in many instances, to contain
the germs of important truths, though blended with an admixture
of error. The traces of affinity between the Irish
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
and other ancient languages which have been collected by
Gaelic Scholars, may be open in many cases to the same remark,
which is clearly applicable to the examples of affinity
pointed out by Mr. Catlin between the dialect of the North
American Indian tribe the Mandans and the Welsh; viz.,
these features may consist of clear and genuine traces of a
generic, though they may afford no proofs of a specific,
affinity of race. There can be no doubt that the Irish preserves
many primitive forms which the kindred Celtic of
Wales has lost; there can be no doubt also that the Irish
approximates to the Latin, to the Greek, and to the Egyptian,<note place='foot'>See the Irish names for the Heavenly Bodies, in Append. A and C.</note>
&amp;c. in many features which the Welsh no longer exhibits.
The examples adduced in Appendix A of the connexion
of the Irish language with the Hebrew, Egyptian, &amp;c.
are sufficient to show that the Irish are a nation of Oriental
origin. But on the other hand it must be borne in mind,
that inasmuch as the Welsh, Latin, &amp;c., have also preserved
primitive forms which the Irish has lost, there is no ground
for concluding that the Gaelic is a Parent rather than a Sister
of these venerable Tongues; and inasmuch as the evidence
of the Eastern origin of the Gael, however unequivocal, is
not clearer or closer than the accompanying<note place='foot'>See Appendix A.</note> evidence with
respect to the Welsh, English, and other European nations,
there are no peculiar grounds for referring the first colonization
of Ireland to a direct migration from the shores of
Palestine or Africa, rather than to the gradual diffusion of
population from a central point.
</p>

<p>
The following comparison presents examples of features
in which the Irish approximates to the Gothic and other
Languages, at the same time that it differs more or less from
the Welsh.
</p>

<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words in which the Gaelic resembles the Gothic, and other
European Languages, more closely than it resembles the
Cymraeg or Welsh.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.2cm} p{1.2cm} p{3.3cm} p{1.2cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(9) lw(9) lw(30) lw(9)'">
<row><cell>English.</cell><cell>Gaelic.</cell><cell>Illustrations.</cell><cell>Cymraeg.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Father.</cell><cell>Ath-air, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell><cell>Atta, (<hi rend='italic'>Gothic.</hi>),
Ayta, Aydia, (<hi rend='italic'>Basque.</hi>),
Attia, (<hi rend='italic'>Hung.</hi>),
Otek, (<hi rend='italic'>Russ.</hi>),
Fader, slightly varied in all the Gothic dialects, except the Gothic properly so
called, Pater, (<hi rend='italic'>Greek &amp; Latin.</hi>)</cell><cell>Tad, (<hi rend='italic'>W.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Mother.</cell><cell>Math-air, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell><cell>Mater or Mutter (with
some trifling variations) in Latin, Greek, and all the Teuto-Scandinavian
dialects except the Gothic&mdash;also in the Sclavonic and Bohemian.
Ath-ei, (<hi rend='italic'>Gothic.</hi>)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Mymmog, (<hi rend='italic'>Manx dialect.</hi></cell><cell>Mam, (<hi rend='italic'>W.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Brother.</cell><cell>Brathair, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell><cell>The Irish form,
<hi rend='italic'>Brathair,</hi> occurs in the Latin and Teuto-Scandinav. tongues; the
Welsh form, <hi rend='italic'>Brawd,</hi> in
the Sclavonian tongues.</cell><cell>Brawd, (<hi rend='italic'>W.</hi>),
Bredar, (<hi rend='italic'>Cornish.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>Breur, (<hi rend='italic'>Manx dialect</hi></cell><cell></cell><cell>Breur, (<hi rend='italic'>Arm.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Sister.</cell><cell>|Siur, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell>
<cell>The Irish form prevails in the Latin, Teuto-Scand. and Sclavonic.</cell>
<cell>Chwaer, (<hi rend='italic'>W.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Piur, (<hi rend='italic'>Scotch.</hi>)</cell><cell></cell><cell>Hor, Huyr, (<hi rend='italic'>Cornish.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. A Company.</cell><cell>Drong, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Drang, a Throng, a Crowd, (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Torv.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Mock.</cell><cell>Magom, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Mock, (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)</cell><cell>Gwatwor, (<hi rend='italic'>W.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Evil.</cell><cell>Neoid, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell>
   <cell>Naughty, (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>)</cell><cell>Droug, (<hi rend='italic'>W.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Olk, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell><cell>Ill, (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>)</cell><cell></cell></row>
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
<row><cell>8. The Bank of a stream.</cell><cell>Rang, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Rand,<note place='foot'>Possibly many of these words may be traced in the Greek, &amp;c., but it would
be foreign to the present subject to enter into too minute a discussion on that
head.</note> (<hi rend='italic'>Germ.</hi>)</cell><cell>Glan, (<hi rend='italic'>W.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. A Step.</cell><cell>Beim, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Bēm-a, a Step, (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>),
Bain-o, to go, Bahn, a Path, (<hi rend='italic'>Germ.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Cam.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. To bear.</cell><cell>Beir-im, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Fero, (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>) Ge-Bähr-en, (<hi rend='italic'>Germ.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Dwyn.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11. Jeering, Delight, A Desire.</cell><cell>Fon-amhad (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>), Foun, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell><cell>Fun, (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>), Vonne, Delight, (<hi rend='italic'>Germ.</hi>), Vunsch, a Wish, (<hi rend='italic'>Germ.</hi>)</cell><cell>Vynn, or Mynn, a Wish, (<hi rend='italic'>W.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>12. A Woman.</cell><cell>Geon, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Cwen, (<hi rend='italic'>Ang.-Sax. &amp; Icel.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Gen-eth, a Girl, (<hi rend='italic'>W.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>13. To know.</cell><cell>Fis-ay-im, Fod-am, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Viss-en, (<hi rend='italic'>Germ.</hi>), Vit-an, (<hi rend='italic'>Ang.-Sax.</hi>), <q>I wot,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Wys, or Gwys, Wyth, or Gwyth, Knowledge (<hi rend='italic'>W.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>14. To heat, or warm.</cell><cell>Gorm, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Warm, (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>)</cell><cell>Gwresogi, (<hi rend='italic'>W.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>15. A Shadow.</cell><cell>Sgath, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Skia, Skiad-on, (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>), Schatten, (<hi rend='italic'>Germ.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Cysgod, (<hi rend='italic'>W.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>16. To speak.</cell><cell>|Raid-him, (<hi rend='italic'>Ir.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Read-en, (<hi rend='italic'>Germ.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Siarad, (<hi rend='italic'>W.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Some of these examples would furnish a more plausible
argument to show that the Irish are a Gothic race than any
which have been advanced to prove that the Welsh are of
Gothic origin! It is singular, for instance, that the Irish
terms expressive of the Domestic relations are so near the
English as to excite in the first instance a suspicion that they
must have been borrowed from the followers of Strongbow!
But this impression must be dispelled by the reflection that
terms of this class are never borrowed from its conquerors by
a nation that continues to retain its primitive language.
Moreover, it will be observed, that the Irish, in the instance
of these words, approaches much more nearly to the Gothic,
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
Hungarian, and Russian, &amp;c. than it does to the English.
Again, the Irish word <q>Gorm,</q> To heat or warm, is <emph>like</emph> the
English <q>Warm.</q> But, on the other hand, its genuineness
is rendered indisputable by its <emph>absolute identity</emph> with the
word 'Gorm' in Persian and Egyptian, (See Appendix A,
p. <ref target='PgApA021'>21</ref>.) Finally, the resemblances manifested above by the
Irish to the Greek are quite as close as those which the
former language displays to the English and other Gothic
Tongues. In these examples, therefore, we may recognize
proofs not of any partial results or specific connexions, but of
the more complete approximation of the European languages
as we enlarge our range of inquiry, and obtain more ample
specimens of each Class.
</p>

<p>
But, notwithstanding the occurrence of some features of
difference, it is indisputable that there exists a close specific
affinity between the Irish and Welsh Languages, which
renders the common origin of the nations who speak them evident.
The original identity of the Irish and Welsh Languages
was established as far back as the commencement of the
eighteenth century, by the investigations of the excellent
Archæologist, Edward Lhuyd, who spent five years in travelling
through the various Celtic regions, and whose comparison
of the dialects of Wales, Cornwall, Armorica, the
Highlands of Scotland, and the Isle of Man, is not inferior
either in soundness of reasoning, or in patient, extensive, and
honest research, to the best German works of the present
day. But although the writings of Lhuyd may be said to
have established the original unity of the Welsh and Irish
races, since the publication of his work, a peculiar opinion
has been adopted by some learned men with regard to the
<emph>time</emph> of their original separation. Of this opinion, Edward
Lhuyd was himself the first advocate; his conclusion was
that though the Irish and British Celts were both descendants
from one stock, they must have been separated into two
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
distinct Tribes before their arrival in the British Islands. The
Gaelic or Irish Tribe he supposes to have preceded the Welsh
or British Tribe, by whom he conceives them to have been
gradually driven to the West, as the Britons were by the
Saxons in subsequent ages. Lhuyd's grounds are as follows:
</p>

<p>
The most ancient names of Rivers and Mountains in the
Island of Britain are very generally composed of terms still
preserved in the Welsh or Ancient British Tongue. But
there are some remarkable exceptions, and in these instances
it frequently happens that the Names may be clearly identified
with Words still preserved in the Irish or Gaelic branch
of the Celtic. For example, the names of the British rivers,
the Usk and the Esk, are particularly noticed by Lhuyd;
these names are identical with <q>Uisge, Eask,</q> the Irish term
for <q>Water.</q> This word, he observes, does not exist in the
Welsh, and he had looked for it in vain in the sister dialect
of Armorica; but, he adds, it is still retained by the Irish or
Gaelic. Hence, he suggests that the Irish or Gaelic branch
of the Celts must have colonized the Island of Britain before
the arrival of the Cymry or Welsh branch, by whom, as he
conceives, they were expelled, after having conferred names
on the principal localities.
</p>

<p>
The evidence of language will be found sufficient to show
not merely the common origin of the Welsh and Irish, but
also to fix a much more recent date for their separation than
that which has been assigned by Lhuyd. It will thence appear
that the Irish are descendants of Colonists of the Welsh
or British race, not of a distinct Celtic sept, and that the
commencement of the separate existence of the Irish nation
must be referred to a comparatively recent date, propositions
of much interest, of which the proofs about to be advanced
will probably be deemed to be at once clear and simple.
</p>

<p>
Lhuyd's reasoning in favour of his theory, that the Irish or
Gael existed in Britain as a separate Tribe, prior to the arrival
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
of the Britons who fought against Cæsar, the ancestors of
the modern Welsh, is founded on a false analogy not unnatural
to a first inquirer.
</p>

<p>
The proposition that the most important local names in
every country for the most part consist of terms belonging
to the language of the very first inhabitants, is one of which
I conceive the truth will be evident. For a proof of this
principle, I may refer to Chalmers'<note place='foot'>Chalmers' Caledonia.</note> admirable analysis of
local names in the Lowlands of Scotland, where, in spite of
a succession of Conquests, and the utter extinction in that
part of Britain of the language of the original inhabitants,
viewed as a vernacular dialect, Welsh and other Celtic names
are still preserved, after the lapse of ages, for the most prominent
features of the country. This result, it may be observed,
is one that flows from the very nature of things.
Even the most fierce and ruthless invaders are compelled to
hold sufficient intercourse with the first population to enable
them to learn the proper names of their localities, and these
names, from obvious motives of convenience, they almost
universally adopt.
</p>

<p>
Now, had Lhuyd shown that the most ancient Local names
in Britain are <emph>exclusively</emph> Irish, there can be no doubt that,
consistently with the principle just noticed, his theory would
have been supported by the facts to which he adverts. But
the most ancient local names in Britain are not <emph>exclusively</emph>
or <emph>principally</emph> Irish; in an equal number, perhaps in a majority,
of cases they are Welsh.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, it may be observed that the names of localities
in this Island furnish highly instructive evidence, not merely
with respect to the different races by whom it has been successively
peopled, but also of the order in which they arrived.
Thus the names of Rivers and Mountains, and other natural
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
objects, at least of the most conspicuous, are Celtic; the
names of the most ancient Towns are Latin, or Latin grafted
on British words; more modern Towns and Villages have
Saxon appellations; those of more recent origin have frequently
Norman designations; and last of all come those
places which have names derived from our present English.
These various classes of names cannot be nicely distinguished
in each particular instance. Of the correctness of the general
principle, however, there is no doubt.
</p>

<p>
But the terms noticed by Lhuyd as significant in the Irish
language do not belong to a different class of appellations
from those which are obviously of British or Cymraeg origin.
The Irish and Cymraeg terms are both found to predominate
most in the names of the most ancient Class, viz. in those of
Rivers, Mountains, &amp;c., and to be thus applied in conjunction.
Hence the natural inference that flows from his facts is not
that these names were conferred by two distinct and successive
races, but that they were imposed <emph>contemporaneously</emph> and
by the same People!
</p>

<p>
Further it may be noticed, that if British Topography presents
words extant only in the Irish Tongue, Irish Topography
also presents names which cannot be explained by means of
the Irish, though their meaning is preserved in Welsh; for
example: There is a place near the head of a Stream in
Roscommon, called <q>Glan a Modda,</q> (from Glan, <q>The bank
of a Stream,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.) There is a place in Wales, called
<q>Glan a Mowdduy.</q> There is a place called <q>Glan-gora,</q> in
a Creek at the head of Bantry Bay; and another place in
Ireland called <q>Glan-gort.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ben-heder,</q> the ancient Irish name for <q>The Hill of
Howth,</q> interpreted by Mr. Moore <q>The Hill of Birds.</q>
(Adar, <q>Birds,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>. The word does not exist in Irish.)
</p>

<p>
Arran, A mountainous Island. (Arran, a Mountain, <hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.
This word does not exist in Irish,) &amp;c. &amp;c.
</p>

<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>

<p>
Mr. Chalmers in his Caledonia states that the prevalent
ancient names of localities in Britain and Ireland are essentially
the same.
</p>

<p>
The conclusions to which these facts legitimately and necessarily
lead are, that the British Islands were originally
colonized by Settlers, who, at the time of the first occupation
of Great Britain and Ireland, spoke one uniform language,
in which the Welsh, Irish, and other living Celtic Dialects
were combined. We may infer, and I conceive most clearly,
that these dialects must be viewed in the light of <q>Disjecta
Membra</q> of the speech of the old British and Irish Celts,
just as the Icelandic, Norwegian, &amp;c. are fragments of the
ancient <q>Danska Tunge,</q> as noticed in the previous section.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown by Dr. Prichard that the population of
Islands has been derived from the neighbouring Continents,
and that the population of the more distant Islands has been
derived in like manner from those which are nearer to the
common source of migration. It is highly unreasonable to
assume that Ireland has formed an exception to this general
rule, considering that the common basis of the Irish and
ancient British or Welsh languages are confessedly the same,
unless it can be proved that the accompanying differences
are such as to require the solution Lhuyd has suggested.
Here, then, the question arises, are the features of difference
between the Welsh and Irish languages more numerous or
more fundamental, in relation to the interval of time that has
elapsed since the Roman Invasion of Britain, than the varieties
of dialect among the Scandinavian nations are in relation to
the period that has elapsed since the colonization of Iceland?
They are not! It will thence
be seen that Lhuyd's theory, as to the remote date of the separation
of the Gaelic or Irish from the British or Cymraeg
branch of the Celts, is founded on an exaggerated conception
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
of the stability of Human Tongues; and that the abandonment
by various septs of different synonymes used conjointly
by their common forefathers will satisfactorily account for the
differences between the Welsh and Irish, to which he attaches
so much weight. It will be perceived, for example, that in the
Icelandic, of which the existence commenced in the ninth
century, and the Continental Scandinavian from which it
then sprang, totally different terms are used for <q>Water,</q> the
very instance to which Lhuyd especially adverts, as regards
the languages of the Welsh and Irish, whom we know to
have existed as separate nations in the time of Cæsar eighteen
centuries ago!
</p>

<p>
Another highly instructive test of the correctness of his
theory may be derived from the investigations of Lhuyd himself,
who, in his comparison of the Welsh and Irish languages,
uniformly distinguished the current terms from the obsolete
synonymous words that occur only in ancient MSS. This
comparison proves distinctly that the Irish and Welsh languages approximate,
as we ascend, at a rate which, if as rapid previously as
we know it to have been up to the date of the earliest MSS.,
would imply that these languages must have been identical
about the era of the Roman invasion. As the changes which
languages undergo in their infancy are more rapid than those
which occur at later stages of their growth, it is possible
that the unity of these Tongues may be ascribed even to a
much later period, an opinion which has been maintained by
a very judicious and excellent writer, Mr. Edward Davies,
who in his <q>Claims of Ossian</q> has published an early specimen
of Irish Poetry, which in Language and Style he regards as
identical with the most ancient productions of the Welsh
Bards. Making every allowance for the irregularity of the
changes which occur in Languages, I do not conceive it possible
that the Welsh and Irish could have differed very essentially
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
in the time of Cæsar. This leads directly to another
conclusion, viz. that the first colonization of Ireland could
not have taken place a great many centuries before the Roman
invasion. Had such been the case, the differences between
the Welsh and Irish Languages must have been proportionately
more extensive. In the time of the Romans we learn
that an Irish traitor arrived in Britain, who stated that Ireland
might be kept in subjection by a single legion, an incident
which tends, however slightly, to favour the opinion that the
sister Island was at that period but thinly, perhaps because
but recently, peopled.
</p>

<p>
Of the extent of the changes which the Celtic languages
have undergone since the first arrival of the Celts in Europe,
we possess proofs of far more ancient date than the earliest
literary specimens of the living dialects of the Celtic in the
Local names of Celtic regions, as preserved in Roman Maps,
and in the existing languages of the French, English, and
other nations, who occupy countries of which the Celts were
the first inhabitants. These names I shall show to consist
of three elements: A union of 1, Welsh, Cornish, &amp;c.;
2, Irish, Highland Scotch, &amp;c.; and 3, Terms not extant in
any Celtic Tongue, but preserved in the Oriental, Greek, and
other languages.
</p>

<p>
As regards the Names of the 1st and 2d Classes, it will
abundantly appear from the ensuing examples that, in the
Topographical Nomenclature of Gaul, Britain, and other
Celtic regions of Europe,<note place='foot'>In this part of the present work I have derived great assistance from Dr.
Prichard's sound and successful researches, and from the labours of M. Bullet,
which are distinguished alike by genius and indefatigable industry.</note> words derived from all the various
Celtic dialects now extant, occur in a manner that leads distinctly
to the inference that these <q>Disjecta membra</q> must
have simultaneously belonged to the language of the old
Celts. Dr. Prichard, who has examined these vestiges of the
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
ancient Celtic Populations of Europe with much ability and
success, leans to the opinion that the Cymraeg or Welsh
Dialects predominate in these names. But the following
examples, which comprise many names derived from the Irish
or Gaelic that have not been noticed by Dr. Prichard or by
previous writers on this subject, will serve to render it manifest
that the ancient Names in Europœa Celtica did, in fact,
include all the various living Celtic dialects very equally and
harmoniously blended.
</p>

<p>
How luminous and distinct these proofs of the identity of
the ancient with the modern Celtic nations are, will be better
understood by a preliminary statement of certain rules, which
will serve to give greater precision and perspicuity to the illustrations
selected:
</p>

<p>
1. There can be no doubt that the Romans, in the Celtic,
as in other countries conquered by them, modified the native
terms by the addition of their own peculiar grammatical inflections,
as in <q>Judæ-i, Britann-i, Sen-ones,</q> &amp;c. Now it is
obvious that in identifying the Celtic terms we must reject
these mere Roman inflections.<note place='foot'>I find M. Bullet in many, and in some few instances Dr. Prichard, have, as
I conceive, mistaken the Roman inflections for distinct Celtic words.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. In many cases the Roman Names cannot be supposed
to involve complete transcripts of the Celtic Names; frequently
they were doubtless convenient abbreviations of the
original names&mdash;names consisting of descriptive terms to
them unintelligible. According to Mr. Reynolds, the Saxons
generally adopted the first syllable only of the Roman or
British names they found in this island. According to
Bullet, <q>Vic,</q> a word of Roman origin for a Village or Town,
has, from similar causes, become common as a Proper name
in Dauphiné; in modern times we have numerous Villages
called <q>Thorpe,</q> the name for a Village in Anglo-Saxon and
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
German. In instances of this kind, there can be no doubt
that originally the names were descriptive, such as <q>Long-town,</q>
<q>Old-town,</q> &amp;c. Tre or Trev is the common Welsh
word for a Town, Village, or residence; it had the same
meaning in Cornwall:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>By Tre, Tres, and Tren,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>You shall know the Cornish men.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
A consequence of the names of the gentry of the county
having been derived from those of their residences, into
which this word commonly entered!
</p>

<p>
In Wales we have numerous examples of <q>Tre,</q> as in
<q>Tre-llwng,</q> <q>The Town</q> of the <q>Pool,</q> (i.e. Welshpool,)
from an adjoining <q>Llyn,</q> or Pool, near Powis Castle; <q>Tre-lydan,</q>
the Broad Village, or Residence near Welshpool;
<q>Trev-alyn,</q> near Chester, the Residence on the Stream;
the <q>Alyn,</q> &amp;c. &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Now according to the Roman mode, such a term as
Trev-alyn would have been changed into Trev-iri, the designation
actually given to the Celts of <q>Treves,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
The following are analogous examples:
</p>

<p>
There is a tribe of Brig-antes in Yorkshire, another in
Ireland, and a third in the North-east of Spain. Many unsuccessful
attempts have been made to show that these distant
Celtic tribes must have been scions of the same tribe.
A much simpler explanation may be given.
</p>

<p>
By referring to the Roman maps the reader will find a
word, <q>Briga,</q> in such general use as part of the names of
towns as to leave no reasonable doubt that it must have
been, like Tre, a Celtic name for a town&mdash;now obsolete.
Thus in Spain we have, Laco-briga, Meido-briga, Ara-briga,
Tala-brica, Augusto-briga, &amp;c. Now the analogous instances
already noticed suffice to point out that the occurrence of
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
Brig-antes as a Roman name of Tribes in three Celtic
countries, is a natural result of the frequent occurrence of
Briga as the first part of the names of Celtic places.
</p>

<p>
The <q>Allo-bryg-es.</q> The name of this warlike tribe, the
Celtic inhabitants of Savoy, has also been the source of perplexity,
which may be removed in the same manner. This
tribe had a town, called by the Romans <q>Brig-icum,</q> which
was said to be <q>the only one they had.</q><note place='foot'>Malte Brun.</note> Now Allo-Bryga
may reasonably be identified with Alpo-Briga, the Town of
the Alps (Briga being clearly the common base of <q>Allo-bryg-es,</q>
and <q>Brig-icum.</q>)
</p>

<p>
The names of Celtic communities, as they appear on the
Roman Maps, may, I conceive, be proved to have been descriptive
of the most prominent natural features of the regions
they inhabited, and not of their lineage or descent, as
seems to have been often supposed. Thus we have the
Mor-ini in Belgium, and the Ar-mor-ici in Gaul on the Sea;
we have the Sen-ones on the Seine, the Tamar-ici on the
Tamar-is, in Hispania, &amp;c. In the Mountainous regions it
will be observed that the names of tribes are derived from the
Mountains. In the flat countries they take their names
from Rivers or the confluence of Rivers. In the same manner
it is highly deserving of remark, that the names of the
different French Departments have been derived from precisely
the same natural features. Thus in the Hilly countries we
have the Departments of the High Alps, <q>Hautes Alpes;</q>
of the Low Alps, <q>Basses Alpes;</q> in the Champaign
countries the Departments are named from the Rivers; such
as the Seine, the Marne, and the Somme, &amp;c. Many of
these French names are literally equivalent to translations of
the ancient Gaulish names, as interpreted by means of the
Welsh and Irish languages. It is impossible to conceive a
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
more perfect verification of the accuracy of these interpretations!
</p>

<p>
I may here observe, that as far as we can perceive, the
various independent communities of Britain and Gaul mentioned
by Cæsar, such as the Edui, the Venetes, &amp;c., did not
consist of <emph>one</emph> clan or sept, they seem rather to have been a
combination of several contiguous septs, to whom no appropriate
common name <emph>could have been</emph> given, except one derived
from the natural features of the district they occupied.
</p>

<p>
The durability of local names has been already noticed. Of
this truth we possess remarkable proofs in those of localities
in France, as preserved by the modern French to the present
day. I do not doubt that the present French names are, in
many instances, much more faithful transcripts of the original
Celtic appellations than those which occur in the Roman Maps
are. Thus, for example, Bonomia, a name conferred by the
Romans upon Boulogne, and of which the origin has perplexed
Antiquarics, may easily be explained as a Roman abbreviation
of the word Boulogne itself, of which the Celtic
meaning will be shown hereafter to be appropriate and unequivocal.
Here it may be noticed, that the Celtic language
did not become extinct in Gaul until many centuries after
the termination of the Roman sway and the establishment of
the Franks in that country. The use of the old Gaulish or
Celtic continued until the eighth century, nearly until the time
of Charlemagne.<note place='foot'>Kerdanet's History of the Language of the Gauls and Armoricans, translated
by David Lewis, Esq., in the Cumbrian Quarterly Magazine.</note> Now we know that the modern Welsh
and Irish, for the most part, continue to use their own primitive
names of localities in those cases in which abbreviations
or translations have been substituted by the English.
There can be no reasonable doubt that the ancient Gauls did the
same, and that these names were in use among the inhabitants
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
of each locality at the time of the final subjugation of Gaul
by the Franks, by whom, in many instances, these names are
more likely to have been adopted than those used by the
Romans.
</p>

<p>
It will also be observed in the course of the following examples,
that names of the class about to be noticed, viz.,
Topographical names of which the elements are not extant in
the existing Celtic dialects, but occur in Oriental words, &amp;c.,
are remarkably well preserved by the modern French. Thus
the <q>Aube,</q> as pronounced by the French, is identical in sound
with the Asiatic terms for Water, and names of Rivers, to
which it is allied.
</p>

<p>
3. By many, perhaps by all those Celtic scholars who
have investigated this subject, it has been assumed that the
living Celtic dialects may be expected to furnish a complete
clue to all the Local Names of ancient Celtic regions. This
conclusion, like the theory of Lhuyd above discussed, is
founded on an exaggerated idea of the stability of Human
Tongues! Neither the Irish nor the Welsh, nor a combination
of all the Celtic dialects, will be found to afford a complete
solution of the Topographical nomenclature of the
ancient Celtic regions of Europe. Names undoubtedly occur
in these countries which have been preserved in none of the
Celtic tongues, names which I shall indisputably show to be
positive transcripts, in many instances, of appropriate terms
occurring in the Hebrew and other languages, with which,
in other parts of this work, the original Celtic dialects will
be proved to have been originally identical. These facts lead
to the conclusion that the ancient nomenclature of Celtic
countries forms in reality a connecting link between the existing
dialects of the Celts and the language of the Oriental
stock from which they are descended.
</p>

<p>
This conclusion, though at variance with the views of many
estimable writers, is nevertheless in unison with those anticipations
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
which historical facts legitimately suggest. It is
only reasonable to infer that since the period of their first
arrival in Europe, the era at which many of these names
must have been conferred (see page <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>), the Celtic tribes
must have lost many words which none of the modern
Celtic nations have preserved. The Celts were settled about
the sources of the <q>Ister, and the city,</q> (perhaps the mountains)
<q>of Pyrene,</q> even in the time of Herodotus, and how
many ages had elapsed since their first arrival is unknown!<note place='foot'>Prichard on the Celtic Languages.</note>
</p>

<p>
There is a certain Class of terms of which the meaning
can reasonably be inferred from their extensive use in combination
with other terms, of which the meaning may be
considered as ascertained. To this class may be referred the
terms immediately following.
</p>

<p>
Catti, Cassii, Casses, or Cad, seem to have meant a People,
Tribe, &amp;c., as in the following examples of the names of
Celtic Tribes:
</p>

<p>
The Abr-in-Catui, in Normandy. The Catti-euch-lani,
the people of Cambridgeshire and the adjoining counties.
The Cassii, in Hertfordshire. The Bidu-casses, in Normandy.
The Tri-casses, a people in Champagne. The Cad-ur-ci, on
the Garonne.
</p>

<p>
The above words seem clearly derivable from the following
Welsh words, which are allied to the Hebrew:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Welsh.</cell><cell>Hebrew.</cell></row>
<row><cell>From Kiw-dod (Kiw-dod-æ, <hi rend='italic'>plur.</hi>) a Clan, a Nation.</cell>
   <cell>Gow, a Body of Men, a Society or Association.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Kiw-ed, a Multitude, a Tribe.</cell><cell>Gowee, a Nation.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Kyf, a Body or Trunk, a Pedigree.</cell><cell>Gow, Gowe, Goweeth, the Body of a Man or Animal.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>

<p>
Tre, Trev, a Village, Town, or Residence, (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>,) a
Tribe, (<hi rend='italic'>Irish.</hi>)<note place='foot'>Tribus (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>.)</note>
</p>

<p>
Trev-iri, the people of Treves. A-Treb-ates, the people
about Arras. (For further examples see Dr. Prichard's work.)
Trev is a common element in names of places in Wales, as
Tre-vecca, Tre-gynnon.
</p>

<p>
Trigo, to reside, dwell, (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
Duro-trig-es, the dwellers on the Water or Sea, the people
of Dorsetshire. (Camden.)
</p>

<p>
Catt uriges. (See Dour.)
</p>


<p>
Dun-um, a Hill, a Fort or Town, generally on a Hill,
(occurs in <hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
Oxell-dunum, a Hill-fort in Gaul, described by Cæsar.
(See numerous instances in Dr. Prichard's work.)
</p>

<p>
<q>Castell Din-as Bran,</q> on a lofty eminence in the Vale of
Llangollen, Wales.
</p>

<p>
Dur, Duvr, Awethur (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>), Dour (<hi rend='italic'>Cornish</hi>), Dur (<hi rend='italic'>Armorican</hi>),
Dovar (<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>, obsolete, but occurs in ancient
MSS.) <q>Water.</q>
</p>

<p>
This word, and Ydōr or Hudōr (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), and Tschur
(<hi rend='italic'>Armenian</hi>), <q>Water,</q> have an obvious affinity. These forms
may be traced in the names of Celtic Localities.
</p>

<p>
<q>Dour</q> occurs in the following names of Rivers: Dur,
(<hi rend='italic'>Hibernia</hi>,) Dur-ia Major, <q>The Doria,</q> and Duria Minor,
(<hi rend='italic'>Gallia Cisalpina</hi>,) Dur-ius, <q>The Douro,</q> and <q>Dero,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Hispania</hi>,) Dur-anius, <q>The Dordogne,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Gallia</hi>). In
<hi rend='italic'>Bucharian</hi> Deriâ means <q>The Sea.</q>
</p>

<p>
Ydōr or Hudōr (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), Awethur (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>), occur in the
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
Rivers <q>The Adour,</q><note place='foot'>As previously noticed, the French names handed down from the old Gauls
are probably often nearer the Celtic than the Latin names.</note> Atur-is (<hi rend='italic'>Gallia</hi>), <q>The Adder</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Britain</hi>), <q>The Adare</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ireland</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>Tschur</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Armenian</hi>), occurs in <q>Stura,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Gallia Cis.</hi>),
<q>The Stour</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Britain</hi>), <q>The Suir</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Britain &amp; Ireland</hi>),
<q>The Souro</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Spain</hi>, a branch of the Tagus.)
</p>

<p>
From the frequent recurrence of all these different forms
in several Celtic countries thus widely separated, it is plain
that they were used conjointly by the early Celts, and represent
various transitions of the same word. Thus <q>Stura</q>
(in <hi rend='italic'>Gal. Cis.</hi>), flows between the neighbouring streams
Duria Major and Duria Minor, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
This word <q>Dour</q> enters very largely into the names of
tribes; it forms singly a natural clue to a great number of
names that hitherto have been referred to a complication of
Roots. Thus the Roman name for the people of Dorsetshire,
Duro-trig-es, i.e. The dwellers on the Water or the Ocean,
has been noticed by Camden.
</p>

<p>
In the preceding, and in several of the following, it will be
apparent that the old Celts applied this term to the <q>Sea or
Ocean,</q> as the Bucharians do, and also to a <q>River.</q> At
present the Welsh apply the term to Water only, in a restricted
sense.
</p>

<p>
In the South-east of England names abound (applied to
places on Rivers or the Sea) in which the two slight variations
of Dur and Du-v-r (or Do-v-ar, <hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>), still preserved
in Welsh, are apparent. Duro-vern-um, <q>Canterbury,</q> from
Duro, Water, and Vern or Veryn, a Hill. (Compare the
name of the <q>Ar-vern-i,</q> under Beryn, at p. 78.) The
Town was on a Hill by the Stour.
</p>

<p>
Portus Du-b-r-is or Dub-r-œ, i.e. <q>Sea Port,</q> the modern
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
<q>Do-v-or,</q> a word which is an echo of the Irish Dovar and
the Welsh Du-v-r.
</p>

<p>
Duro-brivæ, Rochester on the Medway, (Briva or Brivis,
the ancient Celtic for a Town.) Duro-levum, Milton on the
Thames.
</p>

<p>
Lan-du-b-r-is, a Portuguese Island. Lan, a Bank of a
Stream, or the Sea: also an inclosed Space, (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
Tur-ones, the inhabitants of the country at the junction of
several streams with the Loire, the neighbourhood of the
modern Tours.
</p>

<p>
Bi-tur-ig-es, from Bi <q>Two,</q> Tur or Dour, Water, and trigo,
to reside.
</p>

<p>
There are two tribes of this name in Gaul; the Bituriges
Cubi, situated between two of the branches of the Loire, and
the Bi-turi-ges Vobisci, between the Garonne and the Sea,
at the junction of the Dordogne and the Garonne.
</p>

<p>
Cat-ur-iges, from Catti, Tribes or People; Dour, Water,
and Trigo, to reside; on the Durentia, South-east of France,
about Embrun or Eburo-Dunum, which was their principal
town. Cad-ur-ci, from Catti, Tribes, and dur.
</p>

<p>
There is one tribe of this name on the Dordogne, and
another contiguously placed on the Garonne.
</p>

<p>
The mutual support that these interpretations give to each
other will be obvious.
</p>

<p>
The following Irish word for <q>Water,</q> which is not extant
in the Welsh, may be traced in Celtic regions in its various
modifications: Uisge (<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>), <q>The Usk</q> (<hi rend='italic'>South Britain</hi>)&mdash;Eask<note place='foot'>Esseg, <q>Water,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Dongolan, North Africa.</hi>)</note>
(<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>, obsolete), <q>The Esk</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Scotland</hi>), <q>The Escaut</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>North of France</hi>), Isca, <q>The Exe</q> (<hi rend='italic'>South Britain</hi>)&mdash;Easkong
(<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>, obsolete), Axona (<hi rend='italic'>Gallia</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Belg.</hi>), <q>The Aisne,</q>
Axones, the neighbouring tribe.
</p>

<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>

<p>
Names Of Estuaries, Or Mouths Of Streams.
</p>

<p>
The terms of this class, which occur in ancient Gaul, &amp;c.,
consist either of terms still thus applied in the living Celtic
dialects, or of compounds of which the elements may be recognized,
unchanged, in those dialects. Moreover it will be
highly interesting to observe that these terms, for the most
part, consist of Metaphors derived respectively from the same
sources as the two English words <q>Estuary</q> and <q>Mouth,</q>
and the two Latin words <q>Æstuarium</q> and <q>Os Fluminis.</q>
</p>

<p>
One of the principal arguments of those writers who
maintain that the separation of the Irish from the other
Celtic tribes must have been of remoter date than the first
peopling of these islands, is founded on the fact that the
Irish use the word In-ver for the Mouth of a Stream, while
the Welsh use Ab-ber (spelt Aber); a feeble support for so
wide a conclusion, which a correct analysis of these terms,
and a comparison of some interesting coincidences in the
local names of ancient Gaul will show to be utterly futile!
In-ver and Ab-ber are not simple but compound terms,
literally corresponding to the Latin expression <q>Fluminis
Æstuarium.</q> Æstuarium is from Æstuo, <q>To boil,</q> a metaphorical
term, obviously derived from the agitation of the
Waters where two Streams meet, or where a River enters
the Sea.
</p>

<p>
In the first syllable <q>Inver</q> and <q>Ab-ber</q> differ, but they
agree in the last. Both <q>In</q> and <q>Ab,</q> the first syllables of
these terms, occur so often in Celtic regions that there
can be no doubt they were both in use among the ancient
Celts as words for a River, or Water. The last syllable of
these words, Ber or Ver, I shall show to mean an <q>Estuary.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In</q> occurs in the name of <q>The Inn,</q> in the Tyrol, the
<q>Æn-us</q> of the Romans, and in other instances previously
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
noticed. <q>An</q> is a Gaelic or Irish term for <q>Water,</q> which
is identical in sound and sense with terms of frequent occurrence
among the tribes of the American Continent, as in
Aouin (<hi rend='italic'>Hurons, N. America</hi>), Jin Jin (<hi rend='italic'>Kolushians</hi>, extreme
North-west of <hi rend='italic'>N. America</hi>), Ueni (<hi rend='italic'>Maipurians, S. America</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
<q>Ab</q> occurs in <q>The Aube,</q> in France, &amp;c., a name of
which the pronunciation may be considered identical with
Ab, <q>Water,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Persian.</hi>) Ap in Sanscrit, and Ubu Obe in
Affghan, mean <q>Water.</q> <q>Obe</q> occurs in Siberia as the name
of a well-known river. In India also the term has been applied
to <q>Rivers;</q> thus we have in that country the Punj-âb,
(the Province of <q>The Five Rivers,</q>) an appellation of which
the corresponding Celtic terms <q>Pump-ab</q> would be almost
an echo!
</p>

<p>
Further it may here be noticed&mdash;as an example of the
complete identity of the Celtic and Oriental languages when
all the <q>Disjecta Membra</q> are compared&mdash;that this word does
not exist in the modern Celtic in the simple form of Ab, but
in the derivative form of Avon, which is found in the Roman
maps spelt <q>Abon,</q> &amp;c. Now this form also occurs in the
East. Abinn, <q>A River,</q> is given by Klaproth from the language
of the inhabitants of the Mountains to the North of
Bhagalpur. Apem means <q>Water,</q> in Zend, an ancient
Persian dialect. Af is <q>Water,</q> in Kurdish.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<q>Berw</q> is the South Welsh name for the effervescence in
the deep receptacle in which a Cataract foams after its fall;
it is applied also to the Cataract itself, as <q>Berw Rhondda,</q>
the fall of the River Rhondda.
</p>

<p>
Aber, in Cornish, means <q>a Confluence of Rivers,</q> also
<q><hi rend='italic'>a Gulf</hi>,</q> <q><hi rend='italic'>a Whirlpool</hi>.</q><note place='foot'>This word is marked thus, with a dagger, in the Cornish Vocabularies, as being extinct.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Breton or Armorican Aber means <q>a confluence of
Rivers.</q> <q>Dans le diocese de Vannes,</q> says Bullet, <q>le mot
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
a encore une autre signification, c'est <hi rend='italic'>celle de torrent</hi>.</q> <q>In
the diocese of Vannes this word has still another meaning,
viz., that of <q>a Torrent!</q></q> Compare Torr-ens (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>),
<q>Torrent</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>), from Torreo (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>), <q>To boil.</q> <q>Aber,
in a deflected sense,</q> he says, <q>has been applied to a
Harbour; hence Havre de Grace!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is a curious fact,</q> says Chalmers, <q>which we learn
from the Charters of the twelfth century, that the Scoto-Irish
people substituted Inver for the previous Aber of the
Britons. David I. granted to the Monastery of May <hi rend='italic'>Inver-In</hi>
qui fuit <hi rend='italic'>Aber-In</hi> in Chart May.</q><note place='foot'>Chalmers's Caledonia.</note> This remarkable place
is at the <q><hi rend='italic'>Influx of a small stream</hi>, called the <hi rend='italic'>In</hi>, on the coast
of Fife. Both appellations are now lost.</q>
</p>

<p>
Among the names of ancient Celtic regions we have Abrin-catui,
that is (<emph>without any change in the word</emph>) Aber-In-Catui;
the name of a Tribe in Normandy, about Avranches, which
is at the mouth of a River now called the See. (Another
stream flows into the same Estuary.)
</p>

<p>
Aber&mdash;In&mdash;Cattui.
</p>

<p>
Literally,
</p>

<p>
<q>Estuary (of the) River&mdash;Tribes or People,</q>
i.e. The Tribes living at the Estuary of the River or Rivers.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The name of the same place will also furnish an example
of a corresponding term, primarily meaning <q>The Mouth,</q> in
the modern Celtic.
</p>

<p>
Genœ (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>), Ganau (<hi rend='italic'>Cornish</hi>), Gion (<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>), Genu
(<hi rend='italic'>Armorican</hi>), mean <q>The Mouth.</q>
</p>

<p>
The original name of <q>Avranches,</q> when the country was
first subdued by the Romans, was In-<q><hi rend='italic'>gena</hi>.</q> Here it is
plain <q>Gena</q> was synonymous with Aber! The Town was
afterwards called Aber-in-Catui by the Romans, who very
generally gave the names of the Celtic tribes to their principal
Towns.
</p>

<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>

<p>
In D'Anville's Map we find, in the same part of Gaul,
<hi rend='italic'>Aræ-genu</hi>-s given to Bayeux, (the capital of the Bajocasses,)
at the <hi rend='italic'>mouth</hi> of a river now called the <q>Ayr!</q>
</p>

<p>
The following are very striking examples of the occurrence
of the same word, Genœ or Ganau:
</p>

<p>
<q>Gano-durum</q> (Dur water) Constance, at the spot where
the Rhine issues out of Lake Constance.
</p>

<p>
<q>Geneva.</q> (The Rhone issues here from the Lake, and is
immediately afterwards joined by the Arve.)
</p>

<p>
<q>Genua</q> (Genoa). At the mouth of a stream.
</p>

<p>
<q>Albium In-gaun-um,</q> a town to the east of Genoa,
where many streams from the Maritime Alps unite in one
mouth.
</p>

<p>
Beal or Bel (<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>), Buel (<hi rend='italic'>Manx</hi>), <q>A Mouth.</q> This is
another word, applied in Wales and Ireland, in topographical
names, in nearly the same sense as Aber, as in Bala, at the
mouth of a lake, North Wales, <hi rend='italic'>Bally-shannon</hi>, Ireland. This
word does not occur either in vernacular Welsh or in the
Welsh of old MSS. But in Irish, <hi rend='italic'>Beal</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Bel</hi> is still the
common word for <q>A Mouth.</q>
</p>

<p>
We shall find unequivocal proofs that this word also was
used by the old Celts of Gaul, as in <q><hi rend='italic'>Boulogne</hi>,</q> i.e. Bala
(Beal, or Buel) Liane, <q>The mouth of the Liane.</q> The town
is at the mouth of a small stream, of which Bullet, who does
not appear to have suspected the derivation, says <q>La rivière
qui passe à Boulogne s'appelle <hi rend='italic'>Liane</hi>.&mdash;The stream that
runs by Boulogne is called Liane!</q> <q>Liane, Lune,</q> &amp;c. is
a common proper name for a stream in all countries of which
the Celts formed the first population. Lliant (Llian-au, <hi rend='italic'>plur.</hi>)
means a stream, a torrent, in Welsh; Llyn, <q>Water,</q> in Welsh;
and Lean, Irish. Hence <q>The Lune</q> in Herefordshire, &amp;c.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
A further example of words of this Class occurs in the
Latin name of the <q>Humber.</q>
</p>

<p>
This great receptacle of streams was generally called Ab-us;
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
but Ptolomey, in Greek, gives the name more fully, <q>Abontrus!</q><note place='foot'>Ab-us, (Anton.) Ab-on-trus, Ab-ou-trus, Ab-ou, (Ptolomey.) Baxter
suggests Abon trus t, <q>The Noise of the Rivers,</q> an allusion, as he supposes, to
the noise of the currents. But this explanation involves a change in the second
word, and a fanciful construction of the sense of the terms employed.</note>
This word means in Welsh and Irish <q>The Outlet</q>, or
literally <q>The Door</q> of the Rivers. Trus, A Door, (Drous,
<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>, Doros, <hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>,) occurs in the same sense in Tura
(<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>), Der (<hi rend='italic'>Persian</hi>). Hence it appears that the Welsh
word, which is nearer to the term preserved in this name,
has not been borrowed from the English <q>Door!</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<q>Aber,</q> however, was the greatest favorite with the ancient
Celts, as with the modern Cymry! It would seem that this
word <q>Aber</q> was as commonly applied in ancient Gaul, &amp;c.
as it still is in Wales, not merely to the mouths of large rivers,
but to places situated at those of <emph>very small streams</emph>!<note place='foot'>It is only by a very minute and careful investigation of Maps, ancient and
modern, that I have been enabled to verify the correctness of this and many other
Celtic derivations.</note>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Britain.</hi>&mdash;York, Ebor-acum (Caer Eboranch, <hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>; Ever-wick,
<hi rend='italic'>Saxon</hi>.) Is inclosed for the most part between the
Ouse and the Foss, which unite close to the Town! The
river Foss separates <emph>some parts of the Town</emph> from the rest.
</p>

<p>
Eburo-cass-um (Alnewick), at the mouth of the River Alne,
Northumberland. Ever-wick is the name of an adjoining
Village on the same river.
</p>

<p>
Eburo-nes (<hi rend='italic'>Belgic. Gaul</hi>). About the junction of the
Saba and the Mosa. Cæsar states in his account of them
that this tribe had no Town.
</p>

<p>
There was a prince of the Œduans<note place='foot'>A powerful Gaulish Tribe in the East of Gaul.</note> in Cæsar's time, named
Eporo-dor-ix, apparently from Aber-Dour <q>Water,</q> and Rex.
The Gaulish chiefs, like those of the Gaelic Scotch, seem to
have frequently derived their names from their peculiar territories
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
or patrimonies; in the same manner, for instance,
as the chiefs <q>Lochiel, Glengarry,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
As before intimated, it appears pretty clear that the little
nations into which Gaul was divided, such as the Ceno-mani,
the Œdui, &amp;c. consisted for the most part of a combination
of <emph>several</emph> distinct septs or clans each under their respective
princes. The name of the chief (Eporo-dor-ix) just mentioned
may, therefore&mdash;and most probably must&mdash;have been
derived from that of some place no longer capable of being
identified, though the country of the Œdui, the source of
many rivers, abounds in localities to which it would apply
very appropriately!
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gaul.</hi>&mdash;Eburo-dunum (now Embrun in Dauphiné.) At
the confluence of a small stream with the Durance.
</p>

<p>
Since writing the above I find this town in Hornius' map,
marked <q>Epeb r-o-durû,</q> i.e. <q>Mouth of the Water,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
Eburo-briga, a Town. At the junction of one of the streams
that feed the Seine above Sens.
</p>

<p>
Ebro-lacum. A Town near the source of the Loire; precise
situation apparently unknown. But the affinity of
<q>Ebro</q> to the Celtic <q>Aber,</q> and the identity of Lac (um)
with Loch<note place='foot'>Lacus (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</note> or Lach, the Gaelic for a Lake or Water, will be
obvious.
</p>

<p>
Avar-icum (Bourges), at the junction of the L'Evrette with
the Evre, one of the branches of the Cher.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Switzerland.</hi>&mdash;Ebro-dunum, <q>Yverdun,</q> at the mouth of
the river Orbe, that flows there into the Lake of Neuf-chatel.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Spain and Portugal.</hi>&mdash;Eburo-britz-ium, the modern Alco-baza
or Alco-baca, on the Portuguese coast, between the
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
Tagus and the Mondego, and not far from Torres Vedras.
This town is at the mouth of the Alcoa river. The modern
name, Alco-baca, (<q>The mouth of the Alcoa,</q>) is a guarantee
of the correctness of the above construction of the ancient
name!<note place='foot'>This is one of the numerous instances in which, judging merely from ancient
Maps, or from the less minute modern Maps, (<emph>on which this stream is not
marked</emph>,) the situation of a place seems inconsistent with the derivation suggested.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the North-east of Spain, on the Bay of Biscay, we meet
with the word Aber itself in an undisguised form, as we do
in Gaul in the word Abr-in-catui.
</p>

<p>
There is a town, Uxam-<hi rend='italic'>aber</hi>, on a river called in Roman
Maps the Uch-esia.<note place='foot'>Hornius's ancient Map. This place is very near to Bilboa.</note> This is an unfortunate word for the
advocates of the Spanish origin of the Irish, for here we have
the Welsh Aber, in lieu of the Gaelic Inver, in the North of
Spain&mdash;the very district from which the Colony is supposed
to have come! Indeed the Local names in the Celtic regions
of Spain generally approach much more nearly to the Welsh
than to the Irish! This will be seen in some of the following
examples.
</p>

<p>
Glan or Lan, <q>a Sea shore or Margin,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>,) not extant
in Irish.
</p>

<p>
Glan a tuia (Glandeves), at the junction of a small stream
with the Varus, that separates France and Italy.
</p>

<p>
Glan-um, on the Puech River, near Embrun.
</p>

<p>
Cat-a-laun-i. A tribe resident about Chalons on the Seine.
</p>

<p>
Cat-a-laun-i. <q>People (of) the river bank.</q> The name
originally given to this town by the Romans was Duro-Cat-a-laun-i,
i.e. (The Town of) <q>the Tribe on the Bank of the
<hi rend='italic'>River</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Water</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Llanes, a place on the coast of Asturia. (The aspirated
<hi rend='italic'>Ll</hi> of the Spaniards is very like the Welsh <hi rend='italic'>Ll</hi>, and is most
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
probably a relic of Celtic pronunciation.) Lancia (Ciudad
Rodrigo,) Lancia (Guarda.)
</p>

<p>
Lan-dubr-is. <q>The Shore or Margin of the Sea or Water,</q>
or a spot inclosed by the Sea.<note place='foot'>Lan means an inclosed spot in Welsh.</note> An Island, in Latin Maps,
on the coast of Portugal.
</p>

<p>
<q>The Lan-des,</q> The well-known arid sandy deserts forming
the South-eastern coast of France.
</p>

<p>
Medio-lan-um.<note place='foot'>Medius (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</note> Medd, the middle, (<hi rend='italic'>Celtic</hi>,) and Lan.
Towns thus designated seem to have been situated either
at the Curve or Winding of a stream, or inclosed between
two streams.
</p>

<p>
I may instance&mdash;in Cisalpine.
</p>

<p>
Gaul. Medio-lan-um, Milan.
</p>

<p>
Mediolanum (<hi rend='italic'>Santones</hi>), on the Loire.<lb/>
(<hi rend='italic'>Eburovices Aulerci</hi>), Evreux, Normandy.<lb/>
(<hi rend='italic'>Bituriges Cubi</hi>), inclosed between two winding
streams, which are the sources of the Loire. Bi-tur-iges
is from a synonyme, Bi, two, and Dour, Water.
</p>

<p>
Dôl, <q>A wind, a bow, a turn, a meander, a dale or mead,
through which a river runs,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>,)<note place='foot'>Dr. W. O. Pughe's Welsh Dictionary.</note> as in Dol-Vorwyn
and Dol-Vorgan, Montgomeryshire, North Wales; <q>Dôle,</q> the
ancient capital of Franche Compté. (Compare the situation.)
</p>

<p>
Lut-ecia,<note place='foot'>Lutum (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</note> Paris, seems clearly to have derived its name
from its situation among marshes. <q>Située dans une isle
de la Seine environnée de marais profonds, difficiles à
traverser, qui communiquent à ce fleuve.</q> (Bullet, from
Strabo.)
</p>

<p>
Llath-ach, <q>Mud, Dirt,</q> (Irish,) Llaith, Moist, (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Lug-dunum or Lau-dunum.<note place='foot'>Dunum, a Hill Fort.</note> <q>Laon,</q> built on the Summit
of a Rock divided into two branches. Lug, from Llech, a
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
Stone. Clog, a detached rock, (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>) Liag, a great Stone.
Leagan Kloiche, a Rock, (<hi rend='italic'>Irish.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
In the following instances the identity of the Gaulish and
other Celtic names with the Welsh is remarkably clear, and
will be vividly felt by persons vernacularly familiar with the
Welsh language, and the most common local names in
Wales.
</p>

<p>
The <q>Bretons,</q> Ar-mor-ici. Ar, <q>On,</q> Mor, <q>the Sea.</q>
</p>

<p>
The people of a Hilly Region in the South-east of France,
Ar-e-com-ici.
</p>

<p>
Coum, <q>a Hollow Circular Valley, or Depression,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
This word is the source of the numerous names of places in
England ending in Combe. The Oriental origin of the word
is clearly traceable. After describing the great Table-land
of Central Asia as extending over the whole of Persia, Ritter
adds: <q>Towards <q>Koom,</q> (in Persia,) we find the greatest
depression, in the Table-land; here the surface sinks to
2046 feet!</q><note place='foot'>Asia, by Carl Ritter and others.</note>
</p>

<p>
There are also the <q>Com-oni,</q> above Toulon, and Com-us,
<q>Como,</q> to which the word is peculiarly appropriate. (Bullet.)
</p>

<p>
The People of Auvergne. Ar-vern-i, <q>On the Hills.</q>
Veryn or Beryn is a Hill in Welsh. Thus <q>Cevn y Beryn,</q>
is the name of a Hill in Montgomeryshire.
</p>

<p>
By Plutarch the Ar-vern-i are called Ar-ben-i. <q>This is a
very interesting addition to our information. <q>Veryn</q> and
<q>Ben</q> are both synonymes extant in Welsh for <q>a Hill.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
We have the same words repeated in the following instances,
joined with Um (<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>), Am (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>), <q>About.</q>
(Compare the Greek Amphi.)
</p>

<p>
Um-benn i, <q>The People (living) about the Hills.</q> A
Swiss Tribe.
</p>

<p>
Um-bran-ici (from Beryn or Bron, <hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>,) a name of the
Helvii mountaineers to the South-east of the Cevennes.
</p>

<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>

<p>
In the following names, again, we have Pen or Ben, and
Beryn or Bron, alone.
</p>

<p>
Ben-ones, a Mountain Tribe in Switzerland.
</p>

<p>
Breun-i, on the borders of Bavaria and the Tyrol.
</p>

<p>
Bern-enses, the people of Berne, in Switzerland, and also
those of Bearne, in the South of France, adjoining the
Pyrenees.
</p>

<p>
A-Pen-inus Mons. Alpes Pen-inæ, the Alps immediately
to the South of Geneva. Vallis Pen-ina, the Valley of the
Rhone.
</p>

<p>
The primary sense of Pen, in Welsh, is <q>the Head.</q> As
observed at page 11, the names for Hills in that language
are metaphors from <q>the Head, the Breast,</q> &amp;c. Now it is
observable that in ancient Celtic Europe a difference of application
corresponding to the different primary meanings of
the terms is discoverable. Alpes is the general name for the
Alps. (Alpes) Pen-inæ, a term derived from the Head, are
the lofty and abrupt Alps, as distinguished from Alpes
Maritimæ, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
In Spain and Portugal. Pena-s da Europa, (North of
Spain.) Cape Pena-s, (in the Asturias.) Pen-a Longa, a
Town adjoining the long ridge called the Sierra da St.
Catherina in Portugal.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Gebenn-a Mons, the Cevenn-es, <q>South of France.</q>
Cevenn-es, (omitting <q>es,</q> French plural,) is identical with
Cevn, <q>a Back,</q> <q>a Hill,</q> as in Cevn y Coed, the name of a
hill in Montgomeryshire, (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
The Irish Gibhis, <q>a Valley,</q> is from the same source.
Names of <q>Valleys and Hills</q> are generally composed of the
same roots. (Similiter the Latin word <q>Altus</q> means both
<q>High</q> and Deep!) A Valley is, in fact, formed by Hills!
</p>

<p>
These various meanings and inflections are found united
in the Hebrew.
</p>

<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2cm} p{2cm} p{2cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Hebrew.</cell><cell>Hebrew.</cell><cell>Derivatives</cell></row>
<row><cell>Ga.e, to rise.</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Gve, or Gou e, to be high, gibbous, or curved.</cell>
  <cell>Kub, a Mountain.<note place='foot'>Hence the <q>Hindoo-Kuh.</q></note> (<hi rend='italic'>Persian.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Kof. (<hi rend='italic'>Pehlwi.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>Goun, or Gav.n, Swelling.</cell><cell>Gb, the Back. Gbn, Hunch backed.</cell>
   <cell>Gev.n, or Cev.n, the Back, the Ridge of a Hill. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>Gee a. Ga.oun, plur. A valley, or more properly a lawn rising to the top of the
  adjoining hill.</cell>
  <cell>G.b.oe, G.h.o.th, a Mountain. G.b.o.the, the Slope of a Mountain.</cell>
  <cell>Geib-his, Gibhis, a Valley. (<hi rend='italic'>Irish.</hi>)
The Ghauts, Mountains in Asia. Gibb-osus.    (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Goupp en, a chain of Hills in Switzerland. (Bullet.)
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Alp. Dr. Owen Pughe quotes many classical authors to
show that the word meant in Gallish a lofty Mountain. In
the mountains of Glamorganshire, he adds, it is still used for
a craggy summit.
</p>

<p>
Alp-es. Allo-bryges, from Alp- and (briga).<note place='foot'>A Town.</note> Brigi-cum
was their only town. To the South-east of the Allobryges
were the Hel-v-ii, (<hi rend='italic'>Alba</hi> their capital.) To the North the
Hel-v-etii, (Vod in Welsh, a Residence.) Both names were
probably from Al-p.
</p>

<p>
Nant, (Nan-au, <hi rend='italic'>plural</hi>,) a Mountain Valley, <q>a Mountain
Stream,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>) This word is still in use in Savoy. (See
Dr. Prichard's remarks.)<note place='foot'>Celtic Ethnography, in Dr. Prichard's work on <q>Man.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
Nannet-es, a Tribe in Britany, and
</p>

<p>
Nant-uates, a Tribe occupying the valley of the Rhine
below its source.
</p>

<p>
Nang-ates, the people of Connaught. This is one of numerous
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
instances of local names in Ireland, of which the
sense has been lost in the Irish and still preserved in the
Welsh.
</p>

<p>
Cori, or Corrie, means a hollow between hills. A glen
or <q>Cleugh,</q> a small stream.<note place='foot'>The word, in the sense of a stream, seems to be confined to such streams as
traverse the bottoms of narrow glens.</note> (A word of <hi rend='italic'>Celtic origin</hi>.
Jamieson's Etymological Dict. of the Scottish Language.)
</p>

<p>
This word appears to be in use both in the Highlands and
Lowlands of Scotland; the first a Gaelic, the second originally
a Cymraeg district. (See Chalmers's Caledonia.)
</p>

<p>
Sir Walter Scott has very gracefully introduced this ancient
word in the beautiful <q>Coronach,</q> or Funeral-song of the
Clansman, in the <q>Lady of the Lake:</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='pre'>He is gone from the mountain,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>He is gone from the forest,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like a summer-dried fountain,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>When our need was the sorest.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='pre'>Fleet foot on the <hi rend='italic'>corrie</hi></q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Sage counsel in cumber</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Red hand in the foray,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><q rend='post'>How sound is thy slumber!</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
To this passage Sir Walter Scott has added the following
note:<note place='foot'>This word occurs in a variety of mutually connected meanings in the Hebrew
and Celtic.</note> <q>Corrie or Cori.</q> The <emph>hollow</emph> side of the hill where
game usually lies!
</p>

<p>
I conceive a comparison of the following examples will
serve to render it indisputable that this term may be accepted
as a clue to a great number of the most important topographical
names of Gaul and Britain, which have hitherto
eluded the researches of Celtic scholars.
</p>

<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Hebrew.</cell><cell>Celtic.</cell></row>
<row><cell>C.r. To surround, go round.</cell><cell>Cor. A Circle, (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>A pasture or Circuit for Cattle.</cell><cell>Cor-lan. A Sheepfold, (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>A Lamb.</cell><cell>Ka ora, or Kyra. A Sheep, (<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>A <q>Cor.</q> A measure so called from its round form.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>C.eee.ou.r. A Round Pot, or Caldron.</cell><cell><q>Cori,</q> or Corrie. <q>The
<emph>hollow side</emph> of the Hill where the game usually lies.</q> (Sir W. Scott.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>C.r.e. To dig, as a Well or Pit.</cell><cell>A <emph>Hollow</emph> between Hills. A Cleugh. (Jamieson.)</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
The Tri-Cori-i. From Tre and Cori. A tribe who inhabited
the modern French Department of the <q>High Alps,</q>
an Alpine region, the source of numerous streams which feed
the Rhone and its branches.
</p>

<p>
The Petro-Cori-i.<note place='foot'>Petro is said to mean a Rock, in Gaulish names, by some French Celtic
scholars.</note> The inhabitants of the Departments of
Dordogne and Correze. Dordogne is thus described by
Malte Brun:
</p>

<p>
<q>We may pass from the Department of Lot to that of
Dordogne by descending the last river which traverses it
on the South from East to West. It is also watered by the
Ille, the Dronne, the Vezere, and by more than <emph>fourteen
hundred small rivers</emph> and streams. Hills extend along this
country in every direction, but with the exception of two
vallies, those watered by the Ille and the Dordogne, they
bound only <emph>narrow passes, almost all of which are desolated
by torrents!</emph></q>
</p>

<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>

<p>
Correze. From the same authority we learn that two
thirds of this department consists of a mountainous region,
full of <q>ravines and precipices,</q> and that its scenery progressively
assumes more of this wild and romantic character
as you ascend the river Correze, which gives its name to the
Department, and to its principal town. Correze is plainly
derived from Cori.<note place='foot'>Hence, also, as may be inferred, the Curi-osilitæ in Brittany.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Cori-tan-i. A British tribe in Derbyshire, &amp;c., from
Cori and Tania, an addition frequently made by the Romans
to the name of a province or district, as in Aqui-tania,
Mauri-tania. Camden expresses himself totally unable to
explain this term satisfactorily.
</p>

<p>
The following are partly composed of ancient Celtic Topographical
Names, of which the appropriate meanings have
not been preserved<note place='foot'>In such instances, however, the Celtic generally presents words approaching
in sound and sense to those occurring in the Local names, though not so near to
then as the Oriental terms, &amp;c.</note> in the Welsh and Irish, &amp;c., but are
found in the Oriental and other languages.
</p>

<p>
<q>Eryr-i,</q> the Welsh name of the Snowdon Mountains.
This word has been variously explained by Welsh scholars,
as meaning the <q>Snowy Mountain</q> (from Eira, <q>Snow</q>), the
<q>Eagles' Mountain,</q> &amp;c. None of these explanations are
appropriate. Moreover <q>Eryr-i</q> is not the name of a <emph>single</emph>
peak, but of the Snowdon <emph>range</emph> of mountains! <q>E.r.r</q>
is a pure Hebrew word, signifying a very high mountain,<note place='foot'>E.r, a Mountain; by reduplication E.r r, a very high Mountain (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</note>
from which <q>Eryr-i,</q> the name of the Snowdon range, the
highest in South Britain, is a plural regularly formed!
</p>

<p>
Cimas da Our-ar-as, are high Mountains to the North of
Lisbon.
</p>

<p>
Ban-nau Brycheiniog, <q>the Brecon Beacons,</q> lofty hills
in Brecknockshire. Ban de la Roche, the celebrated Pastor
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
Oberlin's residence among the Vosges Mountains, in the
East of France. Ban, <q>Lofty,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>,) Bian, a Hill, (<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>,)
Boun-os, a Hill, (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>,) Ban-k (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>), a diminutive.
</p>

<p>
Bal. <q>Applied in Wales to Mountains that terminate in
a Peak. Balannu, to shoot or spring forth.</q> (Dr. W.
Owen Pughe.) Belan is also applied to Hills, as <q>Nant y
Belan,</q> near Wynnstay. Bala, Bulund (<hi rend='italic'>Persian</hi>), Beland
(<hi rend='italic'>Pehlwi</hi>), Bulund (<hi rend='italic'>Zend</hi>), <q>High.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The Don and the Dune,</q> Rivers in Scotland. Trev-i don,
i.e. <q>the Town of, or on the River,</q> a place on the river
Tarn, in the South of France. Don, Dun, <q>Water,</q> <q>a River,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Ossetians</hi>, a people of the Caucasus). <q>The Don</q> River, in
the country of the <q>Don Cossacks,</q> who are also considered
to be a people of the Caucasus. <q>Donau</q> (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>), the
Danube.
</p>

<p>
From Ar, <q>a River, a Stream,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>) <q>Ar-a,</q> now
<q>the Ayr,</q> that enters the sea at Bayeux, (see before, p. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.)
<q>The Ar-ar,</q> Gaul.  <q>The Ayr,</q> Scotland.
</p>

<p>
From Ee.a.ou.r, <q>a River, a Stream,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,) a modification
of A.r. Wari, <q>Water,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>) <q>The Evre</q> and
<q>Evrette,</q> France. <q>The Wavre,</q> Belgium. <q>The Weaver</q>
and <q>the Wear,</q> England.
</p>

<p>
From Ee.a.r (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>), and Iaro, <q>a River,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Egyptian</hi>,)
<q>The Yarrow,</q> Scotland. (See p. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>.)
</p>

<p>
From Ur, <q>Water,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Jeniseians</hi>, in Siberia,) and Our-on
(<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), terms connected with the previous Hebrew words;
<q>Ur-us,</q> the Ouse, Britain.
</p>

<p>
Thus it will be seen that the various inflections of the
Hebrew word A.r. have been completely preserved in the
names of the different rivers in each of the Celtic countries
of Britain and Gaul.
</p>

<p>
Lamu, <q>the Sea,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Tungusian.</hi>) Lam, <q>the Sea,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Lamutian.</hi>)
Limnē, a Lake, <q>Poetically, the Sea, the Ocean, which seems
to be the most primitive sense; also anciently, as it would
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
appear, the Estuary of a River,</q> Schneider (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>). At
the mouths of the rivers that flow into the Black Sea lakes
are formed, which are called <q>Limans.</q><note place='foot'>Kohl's Russia.</note> Hence <q>Leman-us
Lacus</q> in Switzerland.
</p>

<p>
Lim-ēn, a Haven, (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>,) connected apparently with the
last word, Limnē (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>). <q>Lemanæ</q> vel Portus <q>Leman-is.</q>
Lyme, in Kent, where Cæsar first landed.
</p>

<p>
Jura, a long Mountainous ridge in ancient Gaul. Jura,
a long Mountainous Island (Scotland). <q>Jur-jura,</q> an important
chain of Mountains in the North of Africa. Gora
(<hi rend='italic'>Russian</hi>), Ghiri (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>), a Mountain.
</p>

<p>
In the foregoing examples Celtic words having an affinity
to the Latin frequently occur, employed in a manner that
shows they could not have been borrowed by the Celts from
the Romans. Thus we have the names Ar-<hi rend='italic'>mor</hi>-ici, Ebro-lacum,
names in which terms like the Latin <q>Mare</q> and
<q>Lacus</q> are naturally blended with other Celtic words which
are quite unlike the Latin!
</p>

<p>
I conceive the evidence adduced in the previous pages
must serve to place beyond all doubt the truth of the propositions
illustrated in this Section, viz., that the language of
the primitive Celts of Europe and the British Isles originally
consisted of a combination of the Welsh and Irish, and other
living Celtic dialects, united with many words and forms preserved
in none of those dialects, but traceable in the Hebrew,
the Greek, and the languages of other ancient and distant
nations.
</p>

<p>
The uniformity that presents itself in the ancient local
nomenclature of all the Celtic countries is a very remarkable
and instructive feature, of which an adequate conception can
be formed only by an examination of the Roman Maps. The
identity of names, for example, is found to be as complete
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
when the Roman Maps of Gaul and Britain are compared,
as we meet with in examining the Maps of two English
Counties! To this rule Ireland, as far as we can judge from
the imperfect nature of the information transmitted to us,
formed no exception. These facts lead to the inference that
the Celts must have diffused themselves, within a comparatively
short interval of time, over all the regions of Europe of
which the Romans found them in possession! Had the process
of diffusion occupied a great many ages, there must have
been a commensurate change in the Celtic language, which
would have displayed itself in the local names of the more
distant regions. But no such difference occurs, the local
nomenclature of Britain, for instance, being identical with
that of Switzerland and Spain!
</p>

<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Section VI.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Summary of the Results deducible from the previous Sections.
The Changes which have occurred in the English,
Scandinavian, and Celtic Languages, sufficient to account
for the Differences among all Human Tongues. Causes
which give rise to the Abandonment and specific Appropriation
of Synonymes. Total Differences of Grammatical
Forms no Proof of a fundamental Difference of Language.
The Relation which the Languages of one Continent, viewed
in the aggregate, bear to the individual Languages of such
Continent, the same as that which the ancient Scandinavian
bears to its derivative Dialects, &amp;c. Incipient Changes in
the Language of Australia.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
The facts developed in the previous Sections obviously
present a satisfactory solution of the problem suggested at
page 25, viz., whence it has come to pass that languages
almost totally different in their present composition could
have sprung from one original Tongue? That existing languages
have sprung from one source is a proposition of which
the proofs have been explained in the same Chapter in which
this problem has been suggested. (See Chap. I.)
</p>

<p>
In the preceding Sections it has been shown, agreeably to
the statement contained in Section I., that Languages are
exposed to two prominent causes of change; viz., the abandonment
by different branches of the same race&mdash;1, of different
Synonymes; 2, of different meanings of the same
Synonyme.
</p>

<p>
From the facts Historically proved in the previous Sections
it will be found to be an indisputable truth, that&mdash;assuming
their operation to be continued for an adequate period of time,&mdash;these
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
two causes are calculated to produce, from one parent
Tongue, languages of which the differences are apparently
fundamental. For example, if the differences between the
Gothic and Celtic languages noticed at page <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>,&mdash;languages
which differ almost totally,&mdash;are compared with those which
have been proved to have arisen in the last nine hundred
years among the various branches of the Scandinavian and
the Celtic, it will be seen at once that the latter are of precisely
the same nature as the former. The only distinction
is that they are fewer in point of number! But on the other
hand, it is certain that the same causes of change&mdash;acting
at the same rate during a previous period of treble that length
of time&mdash;might have produced between two branches of a
common original speech differences equally numerous with
those which the Gothic and Celtic exhibit; in other words,
differences sufficiently extensive almost entirely to exclude all
vestiges of original unity!
</p>

<p>
But it must be added, that it would be highly erroneous
to infer that the rate of change previous to the commencement
of the Historical period was the same as it has been
since; it must have been much more rapid! Changes of this
nature are prompted by the dictates of convenience, which
suggest the extinction of superfluous words, and the appropriation
of the remainder to distinct though kindred purposes;
names for <q>Water, Rivers, the Sea,</q> for example,
were doubtless in the first instance applied indifferently to all
these objects. Now, inasmuch as languages are more redundant
in their earlier than they are in their later stages, it is
apparent that these changes, of which this redundant character
is the source, must be more rapid.
</p>

<p>
This explanation would fully account for the diversity of
structure evinced by the Gothic and Celtic Tongues, which
probably differ as widely as any languages of the globe,
without referring the commencement of their separation to a
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
more remote date than would be quite consistent with received
systems of Chronology. That the Celtic and Gothic were
originally one speech, and that the differences which they now
display have arisen in this manner, will be evident from
Section II. (page <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>,) combined with the facts developed in
the other Sections of this Chapter.
</p>

<p>
Difference of Grammatical forms has been supposed to
afford proof of a fundamental difference of language. A
comparison of those of the languages previously noticed will
show this to be a highly erroneous conclusion! The Welsh
and Irish differ most widely in their grammars, though the
general resemblance of these languages proves their original
identity. The German and English also differ very widely,
the majority of the Pronouns being unlike. Again, even the
modern and the provincial English have different Auxiliary
Verbs, &amp;c. &amp;c. These are results of the same principle, viz.,
the tendency to abandon, or appropriate differently, the
various elements of a common parent speech.
</p>

<p>
Moreover since Pronouns, which are the principal basis of
Grammar, are merely different Synonymes for <q>Man,</q> or a
<q>Human Being</q> (see page <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>), appropriated to different
Persons, the supposition that kindred nations may be expected
in all cases to use the same grammatical forms is
founded on the gratuitous and highly unreasonable assumption,
that the process of appropriating these various Nouns
to different Persons must have been complete at a very early
period, before the separation of the Human Race into distinct
Tribes!
</p>

<p>
But though the rejection of superfluous Synonymes, and
the specific appropriation of the remainder are results of the
dictates of convenience, the selection of the particular synonymes
which are retained, and the particular mode of application,
are results dependent on individual caprice and
idiosyncracy. Hence we find, as has been shown in previous
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
Sections, the various branches of the same race adopt and
abandon different terms. This feature, which has been
traced in the Historical progress of languages, completely
explains the phenomenon especially noticed at the close of
the First Chapter, viz., the positive identity which we find
on the one hand, when the languages of the different Continents
are compared in the aggregate, combined on the other
with a difference nearly total among individual languages,
occurring, in many cases, among the languages of contiguous
nations of the same Continent. In each separate tribe there
is a tendency to abandon part of the parent speech, but as
different tribes generally abandon different parts, probably
no portion of the original tongue is lost! Its component
parts are dispersed, and not destroyed! There is a complete
and perfect analogy between the relation which will be found
to prevail between the languages of each continent viewed in
the aggregate as one original Tongue&mdash;compared with the
individual existing languages of the same continent&mdash;and the
relation shown in the previous Sections to prevail between
the ancient <q>Danska Tunge</q> and its derivative Scandinavian
Tongues&mdash;between the Anglo-Saxon and the modern English
Dialects&mdash;between the ancient Celtic and the modern Welsh
and Irish!
</p>

<p>
A recent work on Australia, by Colonel Grey, furnishes
an account of the language of that country, so strikingly corroborative
of the views developed above with respect to the
origin of the various languages of the other four great
Divisions of the Globe, that I have been induced especially
to advert to Colonel Grey's statement in this Section.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The arguments which prove that all the Australian
dialects have a common root, are:</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>1st. A general similarity of sound, and structure of
words, in the different portions of Australia, as far as yet
ascertained.</q>
</p>

<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>2d. The recurrence of the same word with the same
signification; to be traced, in many instances, round the
entire continent, but undergoing, of course, in so vast an
extent of country, various modifications.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>3d. The same names of natives occurring frequently at
totally opposite portions of the continent. Now, in all
parts of it which are known to Europeans, it is ascertained
that the natives name their children from any remarkable
circumstance which may occur soon after their birth; such
being the case, an accordance of the names of natives is a
proof of a similarity of dialect.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The chief cause of the misapprehension which has so
long existed with regard to the point under consideration
is that the language of the aborigines of Australia <emph>abounds
in synonymes</emph>, many of which are, <emph>for a time</emph>, altogether
<emph>local</emph>; so that, for instance, the inhabitants of a particular
district will use one word for <emph>water</emph>,<note place='foot'>Here is an explanation, in the instance of the very same word, of Lhuyd's
difficulty noticed in the last Section.</note> while those of a
neighbouring district will <emph>apply another</emph>, which appears to
be a totally different one. But when I found out that in
such instances as these both tribes <emph>understood the words
which either made use of</emph>, and merely employed another
one, from <emph>temporary fashion and caprice</emph>, I felt convinced
that the language generally spoken to Europeans by the
natives of any <emph>one small district</emph> could not be considered as
a fair specimen of the general language of that part of
Australia, and therefore in the vocabulary which I compiled
in Western Australia, I introduced words collected from
<emph>a very extensive tract of country</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Again, in getting the names of the parts of the body, &amp;c.
from the natives, many causes of error arise, for they have
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
names for almost every minute portion of the human frame:
thus, in asking the name for the <hi rend='italic'>arm</hi>, one stranger would
get the name for the <hi rend='italic'>upper arm</hi>, another for the <hi rend='italic'>lower arm</hi>,
another for the right arm, another for the left arm, &amp;c.;
and it therefore seems most probable that in the earlier
stages of the inquiry into the nature of the language of this
people, these circumstances contributed mainly to the erroneous
conclusion, that languages radically different were
spoken in remote parts of the continent.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>One singularity in the dialects spoken by the aborigines
in different portions of Australia is, that those of districts
<emph>widely removed from one another</emph> sometimes assimilate <emph>very
closely</emph>, whilst the dialects spoken in the intermediate ones
<emph>differ considerably from either of them</emph>. The same circumstances
take place with regard to their rites and customs;
but as this appears rather to belong to the question of the
means by which this race was distributed over so extensive
a tract of country, I will not now enter into it, but merely
adduce sufficient evidence to prove that a language radically
the same is spoken over the whole continent.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>If, then, we start from Perth, in Western Australia, following
the coast in a southerly direction, it will be found
that between Perth and King George's Sound a common
language is spoken, made up of several dialects, scarcely
differing from one another in any material points, and
gradually merging into the dialects of these two places, as
the two points considered are nearer to one or the other.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<q>The word for the Sun at Perth is <hi rend='italic'>Nganga</hi>, whilst at
Adelaide it is <hi rend='italic'>Tin-dee</hi>; but the word used by the natives
at Encounter Bay, South Australia, thirty-six miles from
Adelaide, is <hi rend='italic'>Ngon-ge</hi>, and the word used in the southern
districts of Western Australia for the Stars is <hi rend='italic'>Tiendee</hi>;
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
thus, by extending the vocabularies of the two places, the
identity of the language is shown.</q><note place='foot'>In Appendix A the original identity and subsequent specific appropriation of
the names of the Heavenly Luminaries are especially noticed. See Appendix A,
p. <ref target='PgApA048'>48</ref>. These words occur in the same Appendix; as to <q>Tin-dee,</q> see p. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>,
as to <q>Nganga,</q> see same page.</note>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The reader who by a perusal of the previous Sections has
learned how rapid are the changes which languages undergo,
will not merely conclude, with Colonel Grey, that the population
of Australia must be descendants of one Sept, but he
will conclude also that the first colonization of that continent
must be referred to a comparatively recent date. Australia
is nearly as large as the Continent of Europe, and yet we
find one language prevail over the whole of its extensive
surface! It may be inferred with certainty, from the changes
which one thousand years have produced in the European
languages, that this fact makes it probable that the date of
the origin of the Australian tribes must have been comparatively
recent,&mdash;makes it impossible that it can have been
remote!
</p>

<p>
In relation more immediately to the conclusions developed
in this Section, it remains to be noticed that the trifling incipient
differences of dialect in the language of Australia, as
described by Colonel Grey, afford a vivid picture of the first
phases of that process which, during the course of a series of
ages, has given rise to the different languages of the four
great Continents of Asia, Europe, Africa, and America!
</p>

<p>
But how are we to account for the origin of these numerous
synonymous terms which abound in all, especially
in ancient, languages?
</p>

<p>
This subject will be discussed in the next Chapter.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. On The Origin Of Synonymes.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Section I.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>First Source of Synonymes the Metaphorical Character of
Human Language in its Infancy. Even modern Languages
metaphorical or descriptive, as regards the Names
of Substances recently known to Man. Progressive Change
from a metaphorical to a conventional Character displayed
by more Modern compared to more Ancient Languages.
Illustration from the Sanscrit Words for <q>The Sun.</q></hi>
</quote>

<p>
But not only may the dispersion of Synonymes be referred
to influences of which the active agency still continues; it
will appear that the first Origin of the numerous Synonymes
which Human Language presents may also be explained by
means of causes still in operation!
</p>

<p>
Human Language, in its infancy, was descriptive or metaphorical.
Nouns, or names of objects, were expressive of
some of their dominant or most conspicuous qualities. Hence,
inasmuch as in different individuals, and in the same individual
at different times, the faculty of Imagination is affected
by various characteristics, a great diversity of descriptive
terms were generally devised for the same objects, and these,
as their primitive metaphorical meanings were insensibly
forgotten, gradually lapsed into arbitrary or conventional
Nouns. That this is a correct explanation of the origin of a
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
large portion of the Synonymes in which Human Tongues
abound, will be apparent from an examination of two venerable
Oriental Languages, the Hebrew and the Sanscrit,
which indisputably display through their whole structure a
metaphorical or pictorial character.
</p>

<p>
The same truth is confirmed by facts within the range of
our actual experience&mdash;facts that suggest reflections of high
interest!
</p>

<p>
Several thousand years have passed away since man first
became acquainted with the most prominent and familiar of
those objects with which he is surrounded. For these objects
he has inherited from his remote ancestors names which
he learns in infancy, and which relieve him from the task of
inventing anew appropriate designations. But though Nature
presents no new features, the progress of Science has in
modern times revealed a few new substances unknown to our
forefathers, which have served at intervals to call forth the
exercise of the same inventive powers by which language was
originally constructed! Now if we examine the names that
were originally conferred on the various chemical substances
which have been brought to light in our own and in the last
generation, we shall arrive at the instructive result that these
names almost wholly consist of descriptive terms, representing
either some of their most obvious properties, or the
various conclusions formed by different philosophers on the
subject of their nature and composition.<note place='foot'><p>For example: <q>Carbonic Acid Gas,</q> called also <q>Choke Damp</q> (by miners,)
and <q>Fixed Air.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Carburetted Hydrogen,</q> called also <q>Fire Damp</q> (by miners), <q>Inflammable
Air,</q> <q>Coal Gas,</q> and <q>Gas.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Iodine,</q> from Iōdēs, <q>Like a Violet,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>,) a name suggested by its
beautiful violet tint.
</p>
<p>
<q>Nitrous Oxide,</q> or <q>Protoxide of Azote</q> (terms expressive of its component
elements), a gas discovered by Dr. Priestley, called also <q>Laughing Gas</q> (from
its peculiar property discovered by Sir Humphrey Davy).
</p>
<p>
<q>Gas</q> is from a German word meaning <q>Breath, Air, Spirit,</q> &amp;c. &amp;c.</p></note> Further, we shall
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
find that many of these new substances gave rise, in the first
instance, to numerous descriptive terms! That these terms
were for some time used concurrently! That subsequently a
portion of them fell into disuse! That finally the remainder
gradually lost the descriptive significations at first attached
to them, and acquired the character of mere arbitrary or conventional
names!
</p>

<p>
Hence it is evident, and most assuredly it is a result of the
highest interest, that the native and permanent tendencies of
the Human mind itself distinctly point to the conclusion that
language must originally have been descriptive or metaphorical!
Hence, also, we derive a vivid illustration of the sameness
of those tendencies, as exhibited both in the latest and
in the earliest ages of the world, in the trains of thought excited
by new objects in the minds of the Philosophers of
modern days, and in those of the simple forefathers of the
Human Race, whose
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='pre'>Souls proud Science never taught to stray</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Far as the solar walk or milky way!</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
As we ascend from Modern into remote ages, Human
Language gradually reassumes its Metaphorical character.
Moreover, it will appear that the transition may be traced occurring
in different classes of words at different epochs:
terms for newly-discovered substances or new inventions
being descriptive in all languages; terms for the most common
and conspicuous objects of nature, on the other hand, not
exhibiting this quality, except in the most ancient Tongues;
while in specimens of Language belonging to intermediate
eras, an intermediate character is observable; terms for less
common and less conspicuous natural objects being more
generally descriptive than they are in modern Tongues, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
The nature and steps of this transition will be more distinctly
perceived if viewed retrospectively:
</p>

<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>

<p>
1. Modern Languages.
</p>

<p>
In such languages as the modern English, French, and
German, probably the great majority of terms are conventional,
though we meet with numerous names of animals,
birds, &amp;c. which are descriptive, as <q>Black-bird.</q> In words
applied to new inventions or discoveries, a descriptive character
is commonly displayed, as in <q>Rail-road</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>),
<q>Eisen-bahn</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ger.</hi>), <q>Chemin de fer</q> (<hi rend='italic'>French</hi>), i.e. <q>Iron-way.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. Ancient Specimens of the European Languages.
</p>

<p>
In the oldest written specimens of the Celtic, Anglo-Saxon,
&amp;c., the vestiges of a descriptive origin rapidly increase. The
names of Animals and Birds are found to be nearly all either
descriptive or imitative, and Synonymes are much more numerous
in certain classes of words.
</p>

<p>
The names for <q>The Sun, The Hand,</q> &amp;c., and other objects
enumerated at page 8, as the first on which appellations must
have been conferred by Man, seem to have become purely
conventional previously to the date of the earliest Celtic or
Saxon MSS. But, on the other hand, a comparison of Languages
serves to indicate that in this class of terms also these
Tongues were Metaphorical in remote ages prior to the era
of History. Thus <q>Grian,</q> The Sun, (<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>,) means <q>A
Burner</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>. Again, the Celtic and Gothic races have
been too long separated to use the same conventional terms.
But they frequently agree in the basis of the descriptive terms,
from which the conventional terms are derived. Thus
Llygad, <q>An Eye,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>,) is totally <hi rend='italic'>unlike</hi> the English
<q>Eye,</q> (<q>Auge,</q> <hi rend='italic'>German</hi>;) but it is identical in its root with
the English word <hi rend='italic'>Look</hi>. <q><hi rend='italic'>Traed</hi>,</q> The Feet, (<hi rend='italic'>Celtic</hi>,) is unlike
<q>Foot,</q> but its root is identical with <q>Tread</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>)!
Celtic scholars have often derived the English <q>Tread</q> from
the Celtic or Welsh <q>Traed;</q> but the Verb <q>Tread</q> (<q>Tret-en,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>) is used by all the Gothic nations from the Danube
to Iceland!
</p>

<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>

<p>
The Greek and Latin also conspicuously exhibit a more
Metaphorical character than the modern tongues of Europe.
</p>

<p>
3. The Sanscrit and the Hebrew.
</p>

<p>
It is agreed that in the entire structure of these languages
a metaphorical character is displayed; even such words as
the names for <q>The Sun,</q> &amp;c. are for the most part metaphorical
or descriptive.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The truth and extensive application of the principle under
discussion will be best understood by a perusal of Appendix
A, which contains ample illustrations of the rule that while
the conventional significations of words are preserved in one
Language, the same words commonly occur in others in
kindred metaphorical meanings. In this place, however,
may be appropriately introduced one illustration derived from
the various Sanscrit words for the Sun. These words, which
are all considered to be descriptive or metaphorical, have obviously
formed the source of the following Conventional Terms
for that Luminary, which occur in Indo-Germanic languages
of more modern form:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Different Words for the Sun in Sanscrit, and their distribution
in other Indo-Germanic Languages</hi>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.1cm} p{1.1cm} p{1.1cm} p{1.1cm} p{1.1cm} p{1.1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(9) lw(9) lw(9) lw(9) lw(9) lw(9)'">
<row><cell>Sanscrit.</cell><cell>Persian.</cell><cell>Greek.</cell><cell>Latin.</cell>
  <cell>German and English.</cell><cell>Welsh.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Hailih</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Sol. (S. Hail-ih.)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Hail.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Hail-is</cell><cell></cell><cell>He-elios.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sura</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell>
  <cell>Ser-en, A Star.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sunu</cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Sun, Sonne.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Mihira</cell><cell>Mihira.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Section II.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Second Source of Synonymes. Imitative Origin of the Elements
of Human Language. Imitative Character of Ancient
Languages. Imitative Origin of Language consistent with
the Unity of the Human Race. Supported by Analogy.
Adam Smith's Opinion that the first Elements of Language
were Nouns, considered. Progress of Language in Infancy.
Illustration, from Campbell's Hohenlinden, of the Influence
of the Imitative Faculty on the Imagination. Progressive
Growth of Language. Important Exception to the Principle
of the Imitative Origin of Language. Origin of the
Harsh and Open Sounds of Ancient Languages.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
In its infancy, Language was metaphorical, but it was
directly Imitative of surrounding objects at its birth! Hence,
as will now be explained, another source of the synonymes
in which Human Tongues abound!
</p>

<p>
Did man derive his language from the direct instruction of
his Creator, or from the natural exercise of those faculties
with which he has been endowed? For the former opinion
no argument, either Scriptural or Philosophical, has ever
been advanced. In favour of the latter, proofs deducible
from Language, Analogy, and the actual features of the
Human Mind, conspire.
</p>

<p>
In the Hebrew, and other ancient languages, Man's first
imitative efforts are distinctly traceable,<note place='foot'>See Remarks in Adelung's Mithridates on the Hebrew.</note> and as we ascend
from modern to earlier eras in the history of Human Tongues,
and extend our comparison by including within its range a
greater number of kindred dialects, we shall find&mdash;not only
the features of a descriptive or metaphorical character, as
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
already noticed&mdash;but also the vestiges of an imitative origin
progressively increase. Thus, for example, the English words
for two common birds, the <q>Owl</q> and the <q>Crow,</q> have no
other effect on the ear than that of mere arbitrary or conventional
terms; they have been too much abbreviated any
longer to suggest distinctly the source from which they have
sprung. But in the Swedish <q>Ul-u-la,</q> and the Sanscrit
<q>Ul-u-ka,</q> the reiterated screams of <q>the bird of night</q>
are plainly mimicked, as is the harsh guttural croak of the
crow in the German <q>Krähe!</q>
</p>

<p>
Those writers who have espoused, and those who have
impugned, the conclusion that language is the natural fruit
of the endowments which have been conferred on our species,
have, for the most part, mutually assumed that conclusion to
be irreconcilable with the common origin of the different
nations and languages of the globe. Each ancient sept,
they take for granted, must in that case be inferred to have
had a distinct origin, and to have invented a distinct language
for itself. But there is no necessary connexion between the
premises and the conclusion. All nations may have emanated
from one parent sept, and all languages may have sprung
from one parent tongue, and yet the parent speech may, notwithstanding,
have been the product of Man's own native
energies in the earliest era of his existence! Our species
may have been invested with the faculty of constructing a
language adequate to meet all its first wants, and yet that
faculty may have been exercised only once!
</p>

<p>
The conclusion adopted above is supported by the dictates
of Analogy, as traceable in the instance of provisions made
for wants analogous to those which language is calculated to
supply. Destined to pass successively through various
phases of civilization, and to push his colonies into every
clime and country, Man required and has received, both in
his physical and mental constitution, powers of adaptation
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
that enable him to conform to those marvellous changes which
are incident to his condition as a Progressive Being. His
first infantine feelings are expressed by imitations of surrounding
objects, and as his higher moral and intellectual
faculties are developed, they find utterance in metaphors derived
from the organs of sensation. In those advances which
he was mysteriously intended to make from age to age, he
would have been fettered and not aided by the gift of an
immutable language! His wants in this respect have been
more wisely provided for by the power which has evidently
been conferred upon him of framing in the first instance a
language calculated to express his earliest wants as they successively
arose, and of subsequently moulding it to suit
the emergencies of his condition.
</p>

<p>
It was the opinion of Adam Smith that the elements of
language consist of Nouns or Names of things. From this
opinion, M. Du Ponceau dissents. Nor is this conclusion
confirmed by an analysis of languages, which serves to show,
on the contrary, that these elements or roots partake less of
the character of Nouns or Names of Objects than of that of
Verbs or terms descriptive of their actions and qualities. This
result appears to be a necessary consequence of the imitative
origin of language, for it is only their characteristic sounds or
other salient qualities that admit of imitation, it is impossible
to copy by the voice the objects themselves! The English
word Cuc-koo furnishes an excellent example. This word is
now used as a Noun or Name. But it is quite manifest that
originally it was a mere imitation of the characteristic cry of
the bird, in other words it was descriptive of a single quality
or action!
</p>

<p>
But though they partake of the character of Verbs rather
than of that of Nouns, it will, I conceive, appear that the
roots or elements of language do not in reality belong to any
existing class of grammatical terms. In the Hebrew and the
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
Sanscrit the <q>Root</q> is neither a Noun nor a Verb, but the
common basis of both. Nor is the application of this maxim
confined to ancient languages; it may be shown to apply
extensively to modern languages also, as in the following
examples, derived from the English:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2cm} p{2cm} p{2cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Root.</cell><cell>Noun.</cell><cell>Verb.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Burst.</cell><cell>Burst.</cell><cell>I burst.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Thrust.</cell><cell>Thrust.</cell><cell>I thrust.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Crack.</cell><cell>Crack. Crack-er.</cell><cell>I crack.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Wrench.</cell><cell>Wrench.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Hiss.</cell><cell>Hiss.</cell><cell>I hiss.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Rumble.</cell><cell>Rumbl-er.</cell><cell>It rumbles.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Break.</cell><cell>Break. Break-er.</cell><cell>I break, &amp;c.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Croak.</cell><cell>Croak. Croak-er.</cell><cell>I croak.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
The previous examples will serve to illustrate at once the
proposition they are intended to support, and also the imitative
character of the roots or elements of language. This
character, it will be observed, does not occur exclusively in
terms primarily descriptive of sounds, it is displayed in an
equally unequivocal manner in terms descriptive of other
physical qualities, as in <q>Thrust, Burst, Wrest,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
It is obvious that the human voice possesses the power of
copying sounds more perfectly than other external impressions.
But the <emph>attempt</emph> at imitation is not more conspicuous
than it is in other cases, in which the imitation is necessarily
more imperfect. Thus Kōōm, used in Persia and Wales for
<q>a hollow circular valley,</q> <q>Coop</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>), are attempts by
means of the motion of the lips, &amp;c. to imitate the <emph>shapes</emph> of
the subjects of description.
</p>

<p>
The evidence furnished by language in support of the proposition
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
suggested above, viz., that its roots or elements do
not consist either of Nouns or Verbs, but of sounds which
constitute the common basis of both, will be found, I conceive,
to derive direct confirmation from an examination of
the faculties employed in the formation of language, and the
order of their development.
</p>

<p>
Man is endowed with two faculties of a very different
nature, of which language seems to be the joint product,
viz., with powers of imitation and powers of reflection. Now
the elementary sounds, or roots of language, may be viewed
as exclusively the work of the imitative propensity; the
steady appropriation of these elements as recognized descriptions
of actions and objects seems, on the other hand, to be
the result of the progressive growth and of the reiterated
subsequent exercise of the functions of Memory and Abstraction.
Thus we find infants mimic sounds long before we
can suppose their minds to be sufficiently developed permanently
to associate such sounds with particular objects;
afterwards, as their faculties are gradually unfolded, these
imitations are appropriated as names. Accordingly we find
that almost all children are in the habit of using a certain
number of words thus formed, which are understood and
employed by the guardians and companions of their infancy.<note place='foot'>Some excellent observations on the subject of words thus formed by children
occur in some late numbers of Chambers's Journal.</note>
An instructive example of the natural activity of those mental
qualities to which language first owed its existence&mdash;an activity
which is repressed by no other cause than by the
maturity of languages in use, which fully meet all the exigencies
of the social state!
</p>

<p>
The vehement gesticulations of uncivilized tribes is another
manifestation of the imitative propensity. Nor are the vestiges
of its influence among civilized nations altogether confined
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
to the period of childhood. They may be recognized in
the marked, though generally unconscious, disposition we
feel to select words imitative of the ideas we seek to convey,
and in the pleasure we derive from works of imagination, in
which the sound is rendered <q>an echo of the sense,</q> in conformity
to the critical rule of classical antiquity. Of the
sublime associations called forth by a happy appeal to the
imitative faculty, we possess a fine example in the lines of
the great living Poet, which, with a fastidiousness as marvellous
as the genius by which they were conceived, he proposed
to cancel, as being <q>Drum and Trumpet lines!</q><note place='foot'>This did not apply to the first four lines quoted above.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='pre'>On Linden when the sun was low</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All bloodless lay the untrodden snow,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And dark as winter was the flow</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 7'>Of Iser rolling rapidly.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='pre'>But Linden saw another sight</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>When the trump blew at dead of night,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Commanding fires of death to light</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>The darkness of her scenery!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='pre'>By torch and trumpet fast array'd</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Each warrior drew his battle blade,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And furious every courser neigh'd</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'><q rend='post'>To join the dreadful revelry!</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
(Campbell's <q>Hobenlinden.</q>)
</p>
</quote>

<p>
The progressive appropriation of elementary sounds or
Roots to the various purposes of language, and the consequent
development of grammatical forms, remain to be explained.
</p>

<p>
In the first instance these Roots were, it would seem, employed
alike both as Verbs and Nouns, &amp;c.; the requisite
distinction, it may be inferred, was made by Signs. In the
course of time the Noun was distinguished by characteristic
additions identical, as may be proved, with terms for <q>Man.</q>
</p>

<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>

<p>
This tendency to personify appears, as Du Ponceau observes,
to be <q>according to nature!</q> The English word Smith,
and the German Schmidt, are nouns of the primitive kind,
being mere transcripts of the Root. On the other hand, in
the English <q>Join-er, Break-er,</q> we have examples of Nouns
distinguished as such by a grammatical suffix, <q>Er,</q> which,
in German, means <q>He,</q> and in Turkish means <q>A Man.</q>
In the Pehlwi, an ancient dialect of Persia, which is intimately
connected with the English, and other Gothic languages, we
actually find the English word <q>Man,</q> used for the same
purpose as <q>Er,</q> in the above example. Thus we have
Ruis-man, <q>A Head,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Pehlwi</hi>,) Ras (<hi rend='italic'>Arabic</hi>), and Rosh,
<q>A Head,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,) Lager-man, <q>The Foot,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Pehlwi</hi>,)
Lagyl (<hi rend='italic'>Wogul</hi>), Leg (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>).
</p>

<p>
The Verb, and its different persons, were distinguished by
pronouns, annexed in various modes.<note place='foot'>This is perfectly obvious in the Hebrew, and may be shown by Analysis in
other Languages.</note>
</p>

<p>
Finally, it may be noticed, that since all other branches of
Human Language have been shown to be derivable from
terms originally applied to Material actions and objects, (see
pages <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>;) and since these have been proved to be
products of the imitative faculty, it follows that all the
elements of language are ultimately traceable to the same
source. There is, however, an important exception.
</p>

<p>
There is a class of terms, including many of those expressive
of domestic relations, which cannot be traced to imitation,
but seem to consist of those sounds which are most
easy to pronounce. They may, in fact, be viewed as the
fruits of the first essays of the organs of articulation.<note place='foot'>See Dr. Darwin's Zoonomia.</note>
</p>

<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Hebrew.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>A.m. A Mother. Also, the lower arm (with the hand) by which a child is
  supported.</cell><cell>Amee  A Father, (<hi rend='italic'>Mangree</hi>,
a Negro Dialect.)</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Mamma, Mother, a Teat, a Breast, (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>A.m.e. A Maid Servant.</cell><cell>Mamma.<note place='foot'>The occurrence in the Georgian, as a word for a <q>Father,</q> of this term,
which is generally used for a <q>Mother,</q> is specially noticed by Adelung. Compare
the other example from the dialect of the Mangrees.</note> A Father, (<hi rend='italic'>Georgian.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>A.m.n.  A Nurse, To support, nurse.</cell>
  <cell>A.m.e. A Nurse, (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>A.m.ou.n. A Child, &amp;c. &amp;c.</cell><cell>Mam. A Mother, (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
Mamma (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>).</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
It will be perceived that the application of terms from this
<q>Root</q> was not confined to parents, but was extended to
other objects familiar in childhood.
</p>

<p>
Other examples of the principle just noticed occur in
Abba, <q>Father,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,) Ab-avus, Av-us, and Papa (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>).
These words are clearly traceable to sounds which may be
readily pronounced in infancy.
</p>

<p>
The Hebrew, and some other ancient Oriental tongues, are
distinguished by the frequent occurrence of harsh aspirates
and gutturals, and of vehement and discordant tones, which,
in many instances, are utterly incapable of representation by
means of any sounds in use among the nations of modern
Europe. Now if language had an imitative origin, and if
these ancient Oriental tongues can be viewed as specimens
of language near its source, and the European tongues as
specimens more altered by time, these features of contrast
will be satisfactorily explained. This will be evident from
the following considerations.
</p>

<p>
As Language in its incipient state must have been an imperfect
medium of communication, it may be concluded that
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
the auxiliary aid of Signs was commonly resorted to; violent
motions of the hands and the feet were probably combined
with intonations of the voice, expressive, even to exaggeration,
of the ideas intended to be conveyed. Now the influence
of this cause was obviously calculated to give to language in
its infancy the very qualities which are ascribed to the
Hebrew and some other ancient languages, viz., fulness, distinctness,
and in some respects extreme harshness.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, the natural progress of language will
account also for the opposite qualities displayed by the dialects
of modern Europe. As Society advanced, the severe features
that belonged to Language at its first commencement must
have gradually softened down. Words originally intelligible
only as imitations of the qualities of objects, or by reason of
the signs with which they were accompanied, must have
gradually acquired conventional meanings, calculated to render
the use of signs and of rough and painful articulations
unnecessary. Compare, as examples, the words already
noticed, viz., the English word <q>Crow,</q> and the German
guttural word <q>Krä-he,</q> the English <q>Owl,</q> and the Swedish
and Sanscrit <q>Ulula,</q> and <q>Ulu-ka.</q>
</p>

<p>
Many writers on subjects of this nature appear to fall into
considerable confusion of thought in the eulogies which they
are prone to bestow on those particular languages to which
their studies have been chiefly directed. In some instances
we find a language extolled for the fulness and clearness of
its sounds, while another is eulogized for its softness. These
different qualities cannot with consistency be regarded as
merits in languages that belong to the same stage of society.
A more judicious view of the subject would involve the conclusion
to which the previous considerations must give rise,
viz., that a full and distinct language is the result of necessity
in the infancy of society, and that a soft and abbreviated
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
language is the joint product of the dictates of convenience
and taste that influence its later stages.
</p>

<p>
It is probable that in the features under discussion the
ancient Oriental Tongues do not differ from the languages of
Europe more widely than the earliest differ from the latest
specimens of the latter class of languages. The difference
in this respect between the Anglo-Saxon and the modern
English has already been noticed. The abbreviated pronunciation
of the French, compared to the parent Latin, is
another instance of the same kind. The following is an example
of similar variations in three Celtic dialects, showing
a progressively contracted pronunciation:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(10) lw(10) lw(10) lw(10)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Welsh.</cell><cell>Irish.</cell><cell>Manx.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Arm.</cell><cell>Braich.</cell><cell>Brak (obsolete).
Raigh.</cell><cell>-Ri.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Gold.</cell><cell>Ayr.</cell><cell>Or.</cell><cell>-Eer.</cell></row>
<row><cell>A Year.</cell><cell>Bluyddyn.</cell><cell>Bleadhain.</cell><cell>Blien.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
The Isle of Man was not occupied by the Irish until the
fourth century. Yet the Manx differs from the Irish perhaps
even more widely than the Irish differs from the Welsh.
</p>

<p>
The desire to render language a more rapid and convenient
medium of thought may be regarded as the principal source
of changes of this nature.
</p>

<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Section III.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Application of these Conclusions to the Question of the Unity
of the Human Race.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
It may be objected that if language were in its origin
imitative, the identity of the various languages of the globe
shown in this work may be accounted for on that principle,
without ascribing that important fact to an original unity of
race. But an answer to this objection is involved in the
following passage from the Mithridates of Adelung and
Vater:
</p>

<p>
<q>In those instances in which the sound imitated is very
definite and invariable, the imitation is so likewise (as in
that of the name of the Cuckoo, which is nearly the same
in all languages). But this is seldom the case. Generally
the natural sound is very variable; hence one people imitates
one, and another a different change. A very striking example
occurs in the names for Thunder. Distinct as this
natural sound is, the impressions which it makes on the ear
are very variable, and it has accordingly given rise to a great
number of different names, which all betray, nevertheless,
their origin in Nature. In my Ancient History of the
German Language I have adduced, in proof of this proposition,
353 of these names from the European languages.</q>
</p>

<p>
It appears, then, that the principle that language was
imitative in its origin does not involve the inference that there
is for that reason a tendency in human language to Unity.
On the contrary, this principle leads, as has been shown, to
the very opposite conclusion. Hence features of affinity displayed
by different Tongues must be referred to original
unity of race.
</p>

<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Section IV.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Recent Origin of the Human Race.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
The Hebrew and Sanscrit, as pointed out in the previous
Sections, display certain features which cannot have long
survived the infancy of language. The caprices of custom,
the progress of the human mind, and the dictates of convenience,
are calculated to efface these features within a limited
period of time. Hence it follows, that the existence of language,
and of the Species by which it is employed, could not
have commenced at an era very remotely anterior to the date
of the earliest specimens of these ancient Tongues; for it
must be borne in mind that the identity of the Hebrew and
the Sanscrit with other Human Tongues having been proved
(see <ref target='Appendix_A'>Appendix A</ref>), the vestiges of recent formation which
these two languages display furnish evidence of the recent
origin, not only of the ancient nations by whom they were
spoken, but also of the Human Race. As previously noticed,
no difficulty is felt in accounting for the descriptive character
of the scientific names which occur at page <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, on the ground
that the substances named have only lately become known
to man. The existence in the Sanscrit of numerous descriptive
Synonymes for the <q>Sun</q> (see page <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>), the most conspicuous
object in nature, is an example which, as already
intimated, must suggest analogous reflections.
</p>

<p>
Viewed with reference to the lapse of a few centuries, the
changes language undergoes are too irregular to furnish a
safe test of the date of historical events. But adverting to
the progress of the European languages within the last
thousand years, we may infer, nevertheless, that the effect
of a long interval in producing extensive changes is certain.
</p>

<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>

<p>
Judging from these data, I conceive it may reasonably be
concluded that the ancient Hebrew and Sanscrit remains
could not have preserved the descriptive or metaphorical
character to the same extent as they have done had the
Human species been introduced at a period anterior to the
date assigned to that event by our received systems of
chronology.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. On The Original Identity Of The English, Welsh,
Hindoos, And Other Nations Classed As Indo-European
With The Jews, Arabians, Etc.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Section I.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Sir William Jones's Opinion that the Languages and Religions
of these two Classes of Nations are quite distinct. The
Names of the Gods of Greece, Italy, and India significant
in the Hebrew. Arts brought by the Ancestors of the
European Nations from the East. Names of Fermented
Liquors. Arts of the Pastoral State. Words for Butter,
&amp;c. Close Connexion of the Hebrew with the English.
No specific difference between the Semetic and Indo-European
Tongues.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
Among Orientalists, both in Germany and in this country,
an opinion prevails that there is a specific connexion among
certain Asiatic and European Nations, which they have
accordingly classed together as members of what they term
the Indo-European race. The principal Nations included
in this class are the Hindoos, Persians, Greeks, Romans,
Russians, and other Sclavonic Nations; the English, Germans,
and other Gothic Nations; the Irish and Welsh, and
other Celtic Nations, have more recently been ranged under
the same appellation, in consequence of the researches of
Dr. Prichard, M. Pictet, and Dr. Karl Meyer. The advocates
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
of a distinct Indo-European race assume either that
there is no connexion, or a comparatively slight one, between
the various languages of that race and those of the ancient
inhabitants of Judea, Arabia, and other contiguous nations.
This theory may be viewed as a modification of a conclusion
expressed by Sir William Jones in his Discourse on the
Origin and Families of Nations.
</p>

<p>
<q>That the first race of <hi rend='italic'>Persians</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Indians</hi>, to whom we
may add the <hi rend='italic'>Romans</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Greeks</hi>, the Goths, and the old
<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Ethiops</hi>, originally spoke the same language
and professed the same popular faith, is capable, in my
humble opinion, of incontestible proof; that the <hi rend='italic'>Jews</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Arabs</hi>, the <hi rend='italic'>Assyrians</hi> or second <hi rend='italic'>Persian</hi> race, the people
who spoke <hi rend='italic'>Syriack</hi>, and a numerous tribe of <hi rend='italic'>Abyssinians</hi>,
used one primitive dialect wholly distinct from the idiom
just mentioned, is, I believe, undisputed, and, I am sure,
indisputable.</q><note place='foot'>Sir William Jones's Works, vol. iii. p. 185.</note>
</p>

<p>
While one class of writers have adopted the views of Sir
William Jones, another class have maintained a very opposite
opinion, viz. that the Hebrew is connected, not merely as a
sister but as a parent, with all the other languages of the
globe. The unreasonableness of this opinion, which is totally
unsupported by authority, sacred or profane, has been forcibly
pointed out by Adelung, who observes, <q>Of all the Semetic
languages the Hebrew is the youngest; the Hebrew nation
still slumbered in the loins of their patriarch Abraham at a
time when the whole south-west of Asia, even including
the eastern banks of the Tigris, was already filled with
Semetic<note place='foot'>The term Semetic, i.e. descendants of Shem, for which Dr. Prichard has
proposed to substitute Syro-Phœnician, is applied to the ancient nations of Judea,
Syria, and Arabia. The common origin and specific connexion of most of these
nations which may be inferred from the Scriptural account, are distinctly apparent
from the close affinity of their languages. These Tongues by the highest authorities
have been pronounced to be as nearly related as the Doric and Ionic dialects
of the Greek.</note> nations and tongues.</q>
</p>

<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>

<p>
The proofs of affinity between the Hebrew and other
tongues which have been adduced by the writers last referred
to, are in many instances perfectly sound and legitimate.
But owing to the untenable nature of the proposition with
which they are associated, they have had no influence in opposition
to the opinions of those celebrated men who have
denied the existence of any such affinity between the Hebrew
and the Indo-European tongues.
</p>

<p>
Truth in this, as in many other inquiries, has been lost in
the collision of opposite errors! The Hebrew, it is true, is
not the Parent Tongue, but on the other hand, notwithstanding
the weight that must necessarily be attached to the
memorable passage quoted above, and also to the views of
recent Orientalists, it can be shown, by evidence too clear
and simple to be neutralized by any authority however eminent,
that the languages termed Indo-European are as closely
connected with the Hebrew as they are among themselves.
To these languages, the relation which it bears is that of an
ancient collateral, exhibiting many of the features of a parent
in consequence of the antiquity of its earliest remains, which
contain specimens of Language near to its source. This relation,
except as regards the Sanscrit, is strikingly analogous
to that which specimens of the Scandinavian dialects near to
their common source have been shown to bear to the modern
languages of Denmark, Sweden, and Iceland. (See Proposition
6, p. 46.)
</p>

<p>
As the proofs contained in Appendix A and in other parts
of this work, are sufficient to establish that such is the nature
of the connexion between the Hebrew and the Indo-European
languages, I shall here confine myself to such illustrations
as possess an independent interest by reason of the
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
light, they throw on the institutions and condition of ancient
nations.
</p>

<p>
The identity of the Gods of three of the principal Indo-European
nations has been shown by Sir William Jones in
his luminous and graceful Dissertation on the Gods of Greece,
Italy, and India. But in the passage above quoted from the
same great writer, the conclusion is conveyed that these Indo-European
nations, agreeing among themselves, fundamentally
differed with the Jews and other Syro-Phœnician nations in
two important points, viz. Religion and Language.
</p>

<p>
This conclusion will be found to involve many fallacies of
a very obvious nature. The Assyrians and other Syro-Phœnician
nations were idolaters, though the Jews were not;
and even the Jews were constantly lapsing into the idolatrous
practices of the surrounding nations. We have no reason
for inferring with certainty that the superstitions of the land
of Canaan and of other Semetic countries were different from
those of the Greeks, Italians, and Indians; the evidence
rather favours the contrary supposition. Again, the ancient
Egyptians, whom Sir William Jones classes with the Indo-European
nations, from Language and Geographical position
may reasonably be pronounced to have been more nearly related
to the Semetic nations of Palestine and Arabia. Such
are the errors even of an <q>all-accomplished</q> inquirer in exploring
a new field!
</p>

<p>
That the Jews differed in religion from the nations of
Greece, Italy, and India is a proposition which, in a general
sense, cannot be disputed. But it will now be shown that
this proposition must, nevertheless, be received with two
qualifications, which entirely destroy its application as a
proof of an aboriginal or remote difference of race, viz. 1.
The same conceptions of the Supreme Being as are unfolded
in the Hebrew Scriptures may be traced in the attributes of
the principal Heathen Deities. 2. The names of the inferior
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
Gods are perfectly preserved in the Hebrew language in appropriate
senses, which distinctly indicate the recent origin
of the superstitions of which they were the objects. While
these inferior divinities appear to have been mere personifications
of the powers of nature or of the passions of Man,&mdash;in
the conceptions of the Creator of all things equally just and
sublime,&mdash;which rise above this mass of error in the character
of the Greek Zeus, the Latin Jupiter, and the Indian Brahma,<note place='foot'>See a Treatise by Rammohun Roy, showing that the ancient faith of the
Hindoos involved the unity of the Deity.</note>
the barrier which is supposed so abruptly to have separated
the primitive faith of these nations from that of the patriarchs
disappears!
</p>

<p>
The following analysis of the names of Heathen divinities
may be regarded as a continuation of a similar analysis which
occurs at page 20. As regards the names and attributes of
the Indian Gods, I have availed myself of Sir W. Jones's
Dissertation on the Gods of Greece, Italy, and India:
</p>

<p>
The Gods Of Greece And Italy.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Jupiter, Jov-(is), Jov-(em)</hi>, <q>The Supreme Being,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>); Ee.e.v.e or J.ee.v.e, <q>Jehovah, The Deity,</q>
from E.v.e, <q>To Be,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.) This name is believed to
be expressive of eternal existence.<note place='foot'>Ju-piter is a compound of Pater, a Father, with <q>Jov,</q> which is the basis.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zeus</hi> or <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zēn</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), <q>The Supreme Being,</q> the same as
Jupiter; Zēn, To Live, Zē, He Lives, Zŏŏs, Living, (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>.)
Esse, <q>To Be,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>) Ee.sh.e, <q>To Be,</q> A.ce.sh, <q>A
Being,</q> Ee.sh.sh, <q>Very old Ancient,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Juno</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>), <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ērē</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), <q>The Goddess of the Firmament
and The Queen and Mother of the Gods.</q>
</p>

<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Mercur-ius</hi>, <q>The God of Commerce,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>) M.c.r,
<q>Merchandise, To Sell,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>) Merx, Mercari (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>).
Market (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Min-erva</hi>, The Goddess of Wisdom, (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)  Mēn, <q>The
Mind.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Min-os</hi>, <q>The Supreme Judge in the Infernal Regions,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Latin &amp; Greek.</hi>) M.n.e, <q>To ordain, adjust, number,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Aurora</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>), <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ēōs</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), <q>The Goddess of the
Dawn.</q> (See p. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Phaeton</hi>, <q>Son of Apollo, or The Sun,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin &amp; Greek.</hi>)
Phaethōn, Shining, (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>) Pha.o, To Shine, (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)
Ee.ph.o (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>) Phaethon in Greek was an epithet applied
to <q>The Sun,</q> a word for <q>The Day</q> and for <q>The Star
Jupiter.</q> (Compare Phoibos, Fos, &amp;c. p. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Phos-phor-us</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>), <hi rend='smallcaps'>Phs Phor-os</hi>, The Morning
Star, (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>,) from Phero, <q>To Bear,</q> and Phōs, Light. The
origin of this name will be plain from the last example and
from the analogous terms at p. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>. Phōs, <q>A Star,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Japan</hi>.)
Fosseye, <q>The Sun,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Sereres</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Negroes</hi>,) &amp;c. &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Arēs</hi>, <q>The God of War,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>) War (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>) Or,
<q>An Enemy;</q> O.r.ee.ts, <q>Formidable, Violent;</q> O.r.ts,
E.r.s, Ee.ou.r.ee.sh, <q>To break in pieces, demolish,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>) Eris, <q>Strife,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>M-ars, Mart-is, M-avors</hi>, <q>The God of War,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)
M.Or.ts.e, <q>Violence, Terror,</q> from O.r.ts with M. formative.
(See <q>Ares,</q> above.)
</p>

<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Bell-ona</hi>, <q>The Goddess of War.</q> Bellum, War, (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)
Beli, Bela, War, (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>) Beli, Bela, Havoc, Devastation,
(Welsh.) B.l.ee, B.l.o (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Vesta</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>),<note place='foot'>Vesta is also used for Fire itself.</note> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Hestia</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), <q>The Goddess of Fire.</q>
<q>Her power was exercised about Altars and Houses.</q>
Hestia also signifies a Hearth. Ee.ts.th, <q>To Burn, Kindle,
To be kindled as fuel,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ceres</hi>, <q>The Goddess of the Fruits of the Earth,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)
G.r.sh, <q>Corn trodden out,</q> <q>To spring forth,</q> Tender,
Green, in full Verdure, Vegetables, (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>) Grass (<hi rend='italic'>German
&amp; English.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Harp-yæ</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek &amp; Latin</hi>), <q>Winged Creatures, the fabulous
personifications of Hunger and <hi rend='italic'>Rapacity</hi>!</q> (See Æneid 3.)
</p>

<p>
C'H.r.b, <q>To Consume, waste.</q>
</p>

<p>
C'H.r.b.e, <q>Desolation,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
Harpazo, <q>To Snatch,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Morpheus</hi>, <q>The God of Sleep,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek &amp; Latin.</hi>)
M.r.ph.e, <q>Slothful,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
An interesting consideration deserves especial notice in this
place. On referring to the doubtful and unsatisfactory explanations
which have been suggested for many of these
names of the Gods of Greece and Italy, both by Cicero and
by modern writers, who have relied solely on the intrinsic
resources of the Classical languages, the superior clearness
and simplicity of the explanations afforded by the aid of the
Hebrew will be strikingly apparent.<note place='foot'>Cicero de Natura Deorum.</note>
</p>

<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>

<p>
The Gods Of India.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Brahma</hi>, <q>The Creator,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Indian.</hi>) B.r.a, <q>To Create,</q>
applied to the creative act of the Deity in the First Chapter
of Genesis, (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>) Beri or Peri, <q>To Cause,</q> Bâr, or Pâr,
<q>A Cause,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Siva</hi>, <q>The Destroyer,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Indian.</hi>) Sh.v.a.e, <q>Desolate;</q>
Sha-e, <q>To Desolate,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Vish-nu</hi>, <q>The Preserver or Saviour,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>) Ee.sh.v.o.e,
<q>Safety, Salvation.</q> (This root is applied to the Saviour with
the prefix M. in M|Ou.sh.oe,<q>The Messiah.</q>) Ee.sho,
<q>To save,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rama</hi>, <q>A conquering Deity, a great Deliverer,</q> the same
as the Greek Hercules, (<hi rend='italic'>Indian.</hi>) R.m, <q>To be lifted up,
exalted.</q> R.m.e, <q>To throw, cast down,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cama</hi>, <q>The Indian Cupid.</q> One of his titles is <q>Depaca,
the Inflamer,</q> <q>Love,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Indian.</hi>) Ee.ch.m, <q>To be lustful,</q>
Ch.m, Ch.m.e, <q>Heat,</q> Ch.m.s, <q>To ravish,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sur-ya</hi>, <q>A God of the Sun,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Indian.</hi>) See p. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sat-yavrata</hi>, <q>Saturn</q> of the Latins. Sat.ya, means
<q>Truth or Probity,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Indian.</hi>) Sh.th, <q>To set, settle, fix,</q>
(Hence <q>Sooth,</q> English, not from <q>He saith,</q> as Horne
Tooke conceived.) T.z.d.k, <q>Just,</q> T.z.d.k.e, <q>Justice,
righteousness,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
I shall now advert to some features of considerable interest
in the condition of the primitive founders of the European
nations, of which language furnishes evidence.
</p>

<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>

<p>
The first emigrants must in many instances have brought
with them from the East a knowledge of fermented liquors,
as is shown by the following examples:
</p>

<p>
Wine (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>), Vin-um (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>), Oin-os (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>),
Ee.ee.n (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>), primarily <q>The expressed juice of the
grape,</q> from Ee.n.e, <q>To press, squeeze,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
Osai, <q>Cyder, sweet liquor,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>,) O.s.ee.s, <q>Wine,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,) from O.s, O.s.s, <q>To trample</q>, applied to the
Grapes.
</p>

<p>
M.th.k, <q>Sweet, sweetness,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.) Metheg-lyn
(<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>,) i.e. M.th.k, <q>Sweet,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,) and-Lyn, <q>Liquor,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.) Methu, <q>Wine,</q> (Greek.) Methou, <q>Drunk,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.) These terms may be regarded as primarily derived
from a word expressive <q>of Honey,</q> and of the wine made from
that particular substance, as in Madhu, <q>Honey,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>,)
<q>Mead</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
Mêl (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>), Mel (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>), Meli (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), <q>Honey.</q>
Melissa, <q>A Bee,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>) Mel-ys, <q>Sweet,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>) Melitos,
<q>Honeyed, placid,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>) M.l.ts, <q>To sweeten, to
assuage,</q> (Hebrew.) Melith, <q>Honey,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Gothic.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
Writers on subjects of this nature have inferred that in the
earliest stage of society the human species subsisted on the
spontaneous fruits of the earth or by the chase; the Pastoral
state was the next step, and the adoption of agricultural pursuits
the last stage in the progress. The Celtic and other
European languages furnish very distinct evidence that some
of the European nations must have advanced as far as the
Pastoral state previously to their migration from the East.
</p>

<p>
The art of making <q>Butter</q> is expressed in the Celtic by
a word of which the Oriental origin is clear:
</p>

<p>
Im,<note place='foot'>Ymenyn (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>).</note> <q>Butter,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Gaelic</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
c'H.m.a.e, <q>Butter,</q> from c'H.m.a, <q>To agitate, to
churn,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.)
</p>

<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>

<p>
As this Celtic word is quite unlike the Latin, its Oriental
origin is clear. It also follows that the primitive art it describes
could not have been borrowed from the Romans.
</p>

<p>
The evidence with regard to <q>Cheese</q> is doubtful. Caseus
(<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>) may be viewed as allied to K.sh.e, <q>To harden, to
stiffen,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.) But as the Hebrew does not present the
secondary sense, there is no ground to infer that this art was
brought from the east. Nor, considering the resemblance of
the Latin Caseus and the Welsh Caws, <q>Cheese,</q> can we
infer from language, as in the instance of <q>Butter,</q> that the
Celts did not borrow this process from the Romans, which
most probably they did.
</p>

<p>
The following is a comparison, showing at the same time
the identity of the names for some of the most common
animals in the Hebrew and the Indo-European languages,
and also the interesting fact, which is evident from several of
these examples, that many of the prevalent European names
for Chattels and Money are identical with Hebrew words for
Cattle, Sheep, &amp;c., <emph>which form the only wealth of the Pastoral
state!</emph>
</p>

<p>
B.k.r, <q>Cattle,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>) Pecora, plural of Pec-us, <q>Cattle,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Lat.</hi>) Hence, Pecunia, <q>Money,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Lat.</hi>) Buwch, <q>A cow,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
R.c.sh, <q>Cattle, Riches,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)  Reikis, <q>Riches,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Gothic.</hi>) Riches (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
A.l.ph, singular. A.l.ph-eem, plural, <q>Cattle,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)
Alav, singular. Alav-oedd, plural, <q>Cattle, Wealth,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<q>Sheep</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>) Schaaf (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>) C.sh.b, C.b.sh
(<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>) Sh.e, <q>A Lamb,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<q>Sheep,</q> Kaora, (<hi rend='italic'>Irish.</hi>) Cor-lan, <q>A Sheep-fold,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
C.r, <q>A Lamb, also a pasture or circuit for cattle,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<q>A Horse,</q> Ashwah Eshuus (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)  S.w.s, or
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
S.ou.s,<note place='foot'>This name is supposed by Hebrew scholars to be expressive of swiftness, and
to be derived from S.s, or Sh.sh, Active, Sprightly.</note> (Heb.)&mdash;Pferd (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>,) Peerdt (<hi rend='italic'>Belgian</hi>,) in
the Hebrew, Ph.r.sh-eem, <q>Horsemen.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Cow</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>) Go (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>) G.o.e, <q>To low like
an ox,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<q>A Cat,</q> C'h.th.ou.l, (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>) Cath (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>) Cat
(<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<q>A Monkey,</q> Kăpi, (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>) Kouph (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<q>Goat,</q> Aix Aig-os, (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>) Aja (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) A.k.ou (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)
<q>A name given to the wild goat from its cry.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Hog, Swine,</q> &amp;c., Sukarah (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) Khūk (<hi rend='italic'>Persian.</hi>)
Hog (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>) Houch (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>) Hus (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>) C'H.z.ee.r
(<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<q>Serpent</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)  Serpens (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)  Sarf (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
Sh.r.ph (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>) Serpo, <q>To Creep,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<q>Reptile, Serpent,</q> &amp;c., Neid-yr, <q>A Serpent,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
Newt, <q>A small Lizard,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>) N.d.l, <q>A Reptile,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Chaldæ.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<q>Turtle Dove</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>) Turtur (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>) T.r, T.ou.r
(<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
The connexion between the Hebrew and the English is
remarkably complete, the same words occurring in both
languages unchanged in sound and sense! A few examples
are subjoined, consisting in many cases of words of pure
Anglo-Saxon origin, rarely or never used by the refined
classes of society.
</p>

<p>
N.k.m, To avenge, (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew,</hi>) To nick (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)&mdash;N.g.o,
To touch, To draw nigh, (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,) Nudge, Nigh
(<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)&mdash;B.r, A Son, (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,) Bairn (<hi rend='italic'>L. Scotch</hi>,)
Brat (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)&mdash;Sh.c.l, To be wise, Wisdom, Cunning,
(<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,) Skill (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)&mdash;B.k.sh, To seek, To petition,
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
(<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,) Bhikshati, Beggeth, (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) Beg (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)&mdash;Sh.l.t,
A Shield, (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,) Shield (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>,) Shalita,
Covered, (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>,) Shalitra, <q>Shelter,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>,) Shelter
(<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>,) Shieling (<hi rend='italic'>L. Scotch.</hi>)&mdash;L.b, The Heart, Feeling,
Will, (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,) Liebe, Love, (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>,) Lief, Dear,
Willingly, (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
Colonel Vans Kennedy, to whom we are indebted for a
very able work conclusively showing the original identity of
the Sanscrit and English and other languages termed Indo-European,
is one of the most strenuous opponents of the
supposition that a connexion may be shown to exist between
these languages and the Hebrew, an idea which he treats as
in the highest degree visionary and delusive! In the following,
as in some of the previous examples, the instances of resemblance
between the Sanscrit and the English which this
writer has himself selected are compared with Hebrew words,
identical with these terms in sound and sense! In many
cases it will be seen that the Hebrew terms are even nearer
to the English than the Sanscrit terms are!
</p>

<p>
Măhătwah (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) Might (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>) M.a.d, <q>Might,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)&mdash;Rosha, Rāga (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) Rage (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>) R.g.z (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)&mdash;Kupam,
A Receptacle, (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) Coop (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>) K.ph.ts,
To shut, close up, contract, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)&mdash;Duhitr (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) Daughter
(<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>) Dochter (<hi rend='italic'>Scotch.</hi>) D.g, To multiply, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>) Tek-os,
Progeny; Tek-on, Bringing forth, (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)&mdash;Shringa (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>)
Horn (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>) Cornu (<hi rend='italic'>Lat.</hi>) K.r.n (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)&mdash;Āpăt, A Calamity,
(<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) Ab.ad.n, Destruction, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)&mdash;Bălăwān,
Powerful, (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) B.o.l, A Master, to have power, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)
<q>Baal,</q> i.e. The Ruler, name of an idol.&mdash;Shira, The Head,
(<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) Sh.r, A Prince, A Ruler, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)&mdash;Ghăshăti (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>)
Gusheth (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>) G.sh.m, To rain, A violent Shower, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)
<q>Geesers,</q> Fountains of Hot Water in Iceland.&mdash;Grŭshta
(<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) Grist (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>) G.r.s, To break, crush to pieces,
Wheat beaten out, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)&mdash;Torati (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) Teareth, Tore,
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
(<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>) T.r.ph, To tear off, To tear to pieces, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>) Tori
(<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.)&mdash;Diyati (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) Dieth (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>) Dee.e, Blackness
of colour,<note place='foot'>From the change of hue the body undergoes in death.</note> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>) Dee.ou.a, The Devil, (<hi rend='italic'>Syriac</hi>.) Dee.ou.v,
Ink, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>) Dee, Black, (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.)&mdash;Pesati (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) Paceth
(<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>) Psh.o, To pass, a pace, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)&mdash;Rănăti (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>)
Runneth (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>) R.n (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)&mdash;Shara (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>) Gar. Arrow
(<hi rend='italic'>Ang.-Sax.</hi>) Sh.r.ee.e, A Dart, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)&mdash;Shatati (<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi>)
Shutteth; Sheath, (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>) S.th.m, To stop up, hide,
conceal, S.th.ce.m.e, A Secret, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>) Stum, Dumb,
(<hi rend='italic'>Ger.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
It must be quite evident that in these examples the affinity
in <emph>words</emph> between the Hebrew and the Indo-European languages
is as close as that which exists among those languages
themselves. The difference of grammatical forms has been
much insisted upon. This ground, where it occurs, has already
been proved to afford no evidence of a remote difference
of race. (See p. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>.) But in treating of the North American
Indian dialects, I shall show that no such grammatical
difference does exist in this instance, the Hebrew pronouns,
which are the basis of its grammar, being identical with those
of the Welsh,<note place='foot'>Other examples of the affinity of the Hebrew and the Welsh have been examined
with great ability by Dr. William Owen Pughe, in the Cymrodorion
Transactions. There is also a valuable old work on the connexion of the Hebrew
with other languages, by Mr. Barker, schoolmaster, Carmarthen.</note> now considered to be a member of the Indo-European
group of tongues.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. Identity Of The Egyptians With The Indians, Jews,
And Other Branches Of The Human Race.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Section I.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Identity of the ancient Indian and Egyptian Mythology, &amp;c.
Names of the Egyptian Gods, significant in the Hebrew
and Indo-European Tongues. Dr. Lepsius's comments on
Champollion's opinion that the Modern Egyptian does not
differ from the Egyptian of the oldest Monuments.
Proofs of changes. Proofs from Language that the origin
of the Egyptians cannot be referred to the very remote
date fixed by some writers. Causes of the primitive
features of the Hebrew and the Sanscrit. Identity of
Sanscrit and Scriptural account of the Creation and of the
Origin of the Human Race. Sir William Jones's explanation
of this coincidence. High antiquity of the Indian
Vedas.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
We are indebted to Dr. Prichard<note place='foot'>Dr. Prichard on Egyptian Mythology.</note> for a comprehensive and
satisfactory demonstration of the resemblance in manners,
mythology, and in social and political institutions of the
ancient Egyptians and Indians. These Nations agreed in religious
and philosophical dogmas, in a superstitious veneration
of animals and of the most conspicuous objects of nature, in
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
the system of Castes, and in other features. Dr. Prichard's
German translator, the celebrated A. W. Schlegel, has attempted
to account for these points of coincidence by the
ordinary tendencies of human nature under similar circumstances,
a theory which, though maintained with distinguished
ability, must be felt to be essentially paradoxical. As Dr.
Prichard observes: <q>No person who fully considers the intimate
relation and almost exact parallelism that has been
traced between the Egyptians and the Hindoos, will be
perfectly satisfied with such a solution in that particular
example.</q><note place='foot'>Dr. Prichard on Man.</note>
</p>

<p>
Dr. Prichard concludes that these features of resemblance
must be ascribed to a common origin. But in the adoption
of this conclusion he encounters a formidable difficulty, arising
from the consideration that the Egyptian Tongue cannot,
according to his views, be identified with the other languages
of mankind.
</p>

<p>
This difficulty, like many others of the same nature, will
be found to receive a satisfactory solution from the comparison
contained in Appendix A, in which are embodied a
greater number of words from the Egyptian than from any
other language of the African continent. It will thence be
evident that the failure which has attended the attempts of
the writers noticed by Dr. Prichard to identify the Egyptian
with the Asiatic languages, has arisen from the predominant
error of Philological writers,&mdash;viz. the expectation of finding
in every respect a close and peculiar affinity between the
languages of nations, who, though contiguous, must in all
probability have been separated in the earliest ages of the
world. Hence the unsuccessful issue of those researches of
which the object has been to show that the Egyptian is a
dialect of the Hebrew. But, notwithstanding the unfavorable
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
result which has necessarily attended investigations conducted
on a false basis, it will be seen, nevertheless, that the adoption
of a wider range of comparison, agreeably to the principles
explained at p. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref> and p. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, and carried out in <ref target='Appendix_A'>Appendix A</ref>,
serves to render unequivocally manifest the original unity of
the Egyptians not only with the Jews and other nations of
Asia, but also with those of all the four continents. In this
place I shall introduce, in illustration of this proposition, some
additional examples, which possess an independent interest
in connexion with Dr. Prichard's inquiry into the mythology
of the Egyptians, and with the analogous inquiries pursued
in the last Chapter of this work.
</p>

<p>
The Names of most, if not all, of the Egyptian Gods are
susceptible of a perfectly unequivocal explanation by means
of the Hebrew and the Indo-European languages.<note place='foot'>In some of these instances the Coptic or Egyptian has lost the original meaning
of these appellations, in others it has preserved them in common with the
Hebrew and Indo-European Tongues.</note> This
will be evident from the following analysis, in which I have
availed myself of the account of their names and attributes
given by a high authority&mdash;Mr. Wilkinson.<note place='foot'>Materia Hieroglyphica.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>Neph, Phtah, and Khem,</q> the first three of the Egyptian
Gods noticed below, represent attributes of the Deity.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Kneph</hi>, or, more properly, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Neph</hi> or <hi rend='smallcaps'>Nef</hi>, <q>The Spirit
of God which moved on the face of the Waters.</q><note place='foot'>Wilkinson.</note> Nouf,
<q>Spirit.</q> Nife, <q>To breathe, to blow.</q> Nifi, <q>Inspiration,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>) This word, Neph, has been shown to exist in the
same and in analogous senses in the Hebrew and Indo-European
tongues. It has also been pointed out as occurring
in a remarkable instance as a word for a <q>Spirit,</q> and also as
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
a name of the <q>Supreme Being,</q> among the North American
Indians. (See p. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>.<note place='foot'>Among the Egyptian Deities is Anep, Anepo, the classical Anubis, <q>The
Conductor of Souls.</q></note>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pthah</hi>, <q>The Creative Power that made the World,</q>
styled <q>The Father of the Gods.</q><note place='foot'>Wilkinson, p. 11, note 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
Pita, Pitre (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>,) <q>A Father.</q> Phu-o, <q>Gĭgnō, Produco.</q>
Phu teuō, <q>Machinor Semĭno.</q> Pat-er, <q>A Father,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Khem</hi>, <q>The Sun.</q> (See p. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rah</hi>, <q>Sun,</q> <q>The Material and Visible Orb.</q> (See App.
pp. 2 and 3.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ph-Rah</hi>, <q>Ph,</q> <q>The,</q> and Rah, <q>Sun.</q> Hence the name
<q>Pharaoh,</q> applied to the Kings of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Amun-Ra</hi>, <q>The splendour and beneficent property of the
Sun,</q> <q>Jupiter-Ammon</q> of the classical nations.
</p>

<p>
The word A.m.n, in Hebrew, implies <q>nurturing or
fostering care, to support, to sustain,</q> In Egypt there is a
verb Amoni <q>To hold,</q> and Āmoni <q>To feed.</q> Amoun in
Hebrew, and Mone in Egypt, mean <q>A Nurse,</q> and in Egypt
<q>A Shepherd.</q>
</p>

<p>
Amoni, <q>Patience,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>) Amyn-edd <q>Patience,</q> Amoun
<q>To defend,</q> M-ou yn, <q>Kind,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Neith</hi> or <hi rend='smallcaps'>Maut</hi>, <q>Minerva, called the Mother of the
Gods.</q> Mata (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>) Mat-er (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>) Maau (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)
A.m.a (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>) <q>A Mother.</q>
</p>

<p>
The names of Osiris and Serapis have been explained at
p. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>; that of Hor (<q>Horus,</q>) in Appendix A, p. <ref target='PgApA002'>2</ref>; that
of Io, <q>The Visible Body of the Moon,</q><note place='foot'>Ibid.</note> in Appendix A,
pp. <ref target='PgApA024'>24-25</ref>.
</p>

<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>

<p>
It will be observed that the Egyptian mythology, like that
of the Indo-European nations, as noticed in the last section,
distinctly combines with Personifications of the powers of
nature, views of the attributes and agencies of the Supreme
Being which occur in the Hebrew Scriptures, as in the instance
of <q>Neph.</q> It is remarkable that the same allusion
as this name presents, occurs in the Hindoo mythology in
Náráyana, one of the names given to Vishnu, the Deity
viewed as a preserver or Saviour. Sir William Jones thus
explains this term in a quotation from a passage in which
Menu, the son of Brahma, begins his address to the Sages
who consulted him on the formation of the Universe. <q>The
waters are called <hi rend='italic'>nárà</hi>, since they are the offspring of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Nera</hi>,
(or <hi rend='smallcaps'>I'swara</hi>;) and thence was Náráyana named, because
his first <hi rend='italic'>ayana</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>moving</hi>, was on them!</q><note place='foot'>Sir William Jones on the Gods of Greece, Italy, and India.</note>
</p>

<p>
N-Eerooue means <q>Waters</q> in Egyptian, from Eiero,
<q>Water,</q> the plural being formed by N prefix.
</p>

<p>
Thus it is evident that a comparison of languages in those
very instances which are connected with the subject, so far
from impugning the conclusion that the mythology of the
Hindoos and Egyptians had a common origin, affords irresistible
corroborative proofs of the correctness of that opinion.
Further, it is apparent in the instance of the Egyptian as of
the Indo-European race, that their religious system embodied,
in combination with an idolatrous superstructure, the same
views of the Supreme Being as are developed in the Pentateuch.
</p>

<p>
In some of the foregoing instances, the words of which the
names of the Egyptian gods are composed have been preserved
in the Egyptian itself conjointly with the Hebrew and other
languages. But there are also several instances in which these
terms have been lost in the Egyptian, though preserved in
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
other tongues. This is a distinct proof that the origin of the
Egyptian language is mainly ascribable to the same cause,
which has been previously pointed out as the principal source
of the gradual divergence of the different dialects of the
Celtic and Scandinavian, &amp;c. The Egyptian cannot be said
to differ from the Hebrew or the Sanscrit more widely than
the Celtic and Gothic differ, though the common origin of
the two last may be shown indisputably. At what precise
periods the different changes in the Egyptian language took
place, we have not as yet the means of fully deciding. But
we are not altogether without historical evidence that this
language has undergone mutations, analogous to those which
have occurred in other tongues. Champollion, to whose
genius we are principally indebted for a solution of the
Egyptian system of hieroglyphics, was of opinion that the
Coptic or modern Egyptian is perfectly identical with the
language of the most ancient monuments. But this opinion
has been combated with ability and success by Dr. Lepsius,
to whom we owe much information with regard to the
ancient Egyptian remains, especially the brilliant discovery
that the alphabet of Egyptian hieroglyphics, supposed by
Champollion to consist of 300, is reducible to thirty letters.<note place='foot'>Lepsius Lettre à Rosselini.</note>
Dr. Lepsius points out many striking instances of deviation.
Thus he notices that Plutarch, in explaining the name of
Osiris, whose symbol was The Eye, informs us that the
Egyptians called the Eye <q>Iri,</q> a word not found in the
Coptic, in which <q>Bal</q> is the only term used for that organ.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Lepsius has also produced in illustration of his views
several examples, in which he infers from the mode of spelling,
that the same terms must have been pronounced in the
age of hieroglyphics in a different manner from what they
were in the Coptic. The following are instances:
</p>

<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2cm} p{2cm} p{2cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>English.</cell><cell>Ancient Egyptian Of The Age Of Hieroglyphics.</cell>
  <cell>Modern Egyptian Or Coptic.</cell></row>
<row><cell>The Sun</cell><cell>R.ha.</cell><cell>Ra.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Day</cell><cell>H.rou.</cell><cell>Hour.</cell></row>
<row><cell>The Sea</cell><cell>Imo.</cell><cell>Iom.</cell></row>
<row><cell>A Swine</cell><cell>R.ri.</cell><cell>Rir.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
It has been previously shown by a comparison of tongues
of which the history can be traced, that language in its infancy
appears to have abounded in full and harsh tones and
in rough aspirates, which were gradually exchanged for softer
and more abbreviated forms during more advanced stages of
society. The conformity of these examples to this principle
will be obvious, especially when they are compared with the
instances of similar changes in the Manx and Irish, &amp;c.
noticed at page 108, a comparison which must tend very
strongly to confirm the soundness of Dr. Lepsius's conclusions.
Since the recent origin of the Hebrew and Sanscrit
languages and of the Hebrew and Indian nations have been
shown on the one hand, while on the other the identity of
the Egyptian with those tongues has also been established, it
follows that the origin of the Egyptian nation cannot be referred
to a period anterior to that which our received systems
of chronology would lead us to adopt as the era of the separation
of nations. The harsh and full pronunciation which
seems to have characterized the most ancient specimens of
the Egyptian language tends strongly to support the same
conclusion.
</p>

<p>
In the previous pages a peculiarly primitive character has
been attributed to two ancient languages just adverted to, viz.
the Hebrew and the Sanscrit. Both these tongues, it has been
observed, display in a higher degree than any other the characteristic
features of language near its source. As regards the
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
former of these tongues, the Hebrew, there is an obvious reason
for the primitive forms of language it involves in the high
antiquity of a portion of its remains, viz. the first Books of
Scripture, which are more ancient by many centuries than
the poems of Homer, the most venerable literary remains of
Europe. It is a remarkable fact that there is every reason to
believe that the same explanation will be found to apply in
an equal degree to the Sanscrit. According to the opinions
of many of the most distinguished Orientalists, it would
appear that the earliest Vedas, the oldest mythological books
of the Indians, are not less ancient than the Pentateuch.
Sir William Jones, whose candour and love of truth were
not inferior to his accomplishments, concluded the Vedas to
have been written about 1500 years <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> The soundness of
this opinion was at one time much questioned; but it has
been confirmed by the sanction of some of the ablest of those
who,&mdash;with the advantage of more recently accumulated information,
have in our time pursued the same path of inquiry&mdash;in
a manner that serves to place in a striking point of view
the vast knowledge and the bold and sagacious judgment of
its great author. Ritter, a distinguished German Orientalist,
concludes the Vedas to have been collected during the period
from 1400 to 1600, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>; and Mr. Colebrooke, whose
researches are of the highest value, appears to have shown
finally that the earliest Vedas were probably written about
1400 years <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi><note place='foot'>See a short summary of Mr. Colebrooke's views in Dr. Prichard on Man, in
his observations on the Egyptians.</note> It is highly deserving of notice that these
various dates all fall about the time of the Exodus of the
Israelites from Egypt, 1490 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The account given in the Vedas of the early history of the
world coincides in its most important features with the Scriptural
relation in a manner not to be mistaken. Sir William
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
Jones, struck with these features of resemblance, has intimated
an opinion that the Indian account of the Creation, of
the Deluge,<note place='foot'>Sir William Jones on the Gods of Greece, Italy, and India.</note> and other events may have been borrowed from
the Jewish nation.<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note> It is remarkable that this opinion will
be found to involve a singular anachronism, if we adopt Sir
William Jones's own views with respect to the date of the
Vedas, viz. that they were written 1500 years <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> This date
is ten years prior to the Exodus of the Israelites from Egypt,
an event from which their national existence and the composition
of their earliest scriptures may be said to have commenced.
</p>

<p>
It is highly improbable in every point of view that the
Indians could have borrowed from the Jews some of the
most important doctrines of their religious belief. But the
coincidences noticed by Sir William Jones and other writers,
and the peculiarly vivid and distinct nature of the accounts
contained in the Vedas, admit of a more simple and consistent
explanation. If, agreeably to the opinions of Mr. Colebrooke,
we assume these books to have been compiled about 1400
years <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, it would follow that they embody a narrative much
nearer in point of date to the events they record than any
other, with the exception of the Pentateuch.
</p>

<p>
From the Deluge to 1400 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> there was a lapse of 948
years only. Now we have satisfactory evidence that traditions
far less calculated to leave a lasting impression have been
preserved in many instances among separate tribes with considerable
uniformity for a much longer period. Thus we
know that the Fairy Tales of the English and Germans, and
of the Welsh and Armoricans, agree in their main features,
though in both instances there has been a separation for an
interval of much greater duration.
</p>

<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>

<p>
Traditions similar to those embodied in the Vedas occur
in the classical fable of Deucalion and Pyrrha, in the remains
of the Chaldeans, and of other primitive nations. It is only
in the Scriptural narrative that we meet with a relation of
the first incidents in the history of man unmingled with fables
derogatory to the attributes of his Creator. But though
clouded with mythological fictions, the remains of many
ancient nations impressively display a fresh and vivid reminiscence
of the sublime events they record.
</p>

<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Section II.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>High Antiquity of the Egyptian Nation. Interesting Character
of Egyptian Remains. Extent of Egyptian Conquests.
Tartars, Parthians, Turks, &amp;c. Figures of Jews
on Egyptian Monuments. Egyptian and Semetic Languages
and Races connecting links between the Asiatic and
African Languages and Races.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
The Egyptian annals of Manetho seem to convey the inference
that there must have been in Egypt a series of thirty
dynasties, whose reigns occupied a period of time reaching
far beyond the commencement of our received chronology.
It appears, however, that in the present age the most eminent
writers on the antiquities of Egypt are agreed in rejecting
this conclusion. The long dynasties of these chronicles
are referred by some writers to repetition, by others to the
coexistence of distinct dynasties in different parts of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
But the same eminent writers who have agreed in repudiating
the conclusion that seems to be conveyed by Manetho
may be said to be equally unanimous in referring the origin
of the Egyptians to a date which, tried by the standard of received
chronology, will be found to coincide with the very
first age in the history of nations.
</p>

<p>
<q>By a comparison of Manetho's work with the Theban
table of Eratosthenes,</q> observes Dr. Prichard,<note place='foot'>Prichard on Man, vol. ii. p. 199.</note> <q>we find
satisfactory data for fixing the origin of the Egyptian
monarchy as deduced from these documents in the 24th
century before our era.</q>
</p>

<p>
Other eminent writers on this subject do not perfectly coincide
with Dr. Prichard in adopting this precise date. But
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
they all fix on pretty nearly the same time, which, it will be
observed, is about the era of the Flood of Scripture, which
immediately preceded the diffusion of the human race. In
the annexed Table I have introduced a compendious statement
of the views of these writers, more especially of the author
of a work entitled <q>A Monumental History of Egypt,</q> in a
form that will exhibit concurrently the principal Chronological
facts and the progress of Writing in Egypt. I may observe
that Dr. Lepsius is of opinion that Hieroglyphics, which
is a mode of conveying ideas by representations of objects
without reference to their names, was the source,&mdash;(by means
of a gradual transition,)&mdash;of phonetic characters, which represented
their names or words.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>Egyptian Chronology.</cell><cell>Progress Of Hieroglyphics
And Writing.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Doubtful Period.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>The accession of Menai or Menes, and earlier Egyptian
Kings.<note place='foot'>Mr. Wilkinson refers the reign of Menes to 2320 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi></note></cell></row>
<row><cell>First Pyramid built, it is supposed, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
2123</cell><cell>No hieroglyphics on this Pyramid.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Historical.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Abraham visits Egypt. 1920</cell><cell>Hieroglyphics invented,
and gave rise to Phonetic
writing, between 2123 and
1740.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Osirtasen united Egypt into one Monarchy. 1740</cell>
  <cell>The name of Osirtasen, in this reign the first known
specimen of Phonetic characters.
(<hi rend='italic'>Monumental Hist.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>Joseph in Egypt. 1706</cell></row>
<row><cell>18th Dynasty. 1576</cell><cell>Age of MSS. (<hi rend='italic'>Dr. Lepsius.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>

<p>
According to the author of the Monumental History, previously
to the year 1740 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, the commencement of the reign
of Osirtasen, who is believed to have been the contemporary
and patron of Joseph, <q>we have little to guide us on the
Monuments of ancient Egypt.</q> According to the same
writer, he was the first who united Egypt into one kingdom,
that country, he maintains, having previously been divided
into little unimportant kingdoms.
</p>

<p>
The arguments of this able writer, however, do not impugn
the conclusion, that though the precise date may be uncertain,
the origin of the Egyptian nation must be referred to the first
ages of the human race. The condition of the Egyptians in
1740 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> implies a prior existence for many ages, of which
we have a distinct proof in the visit of (the Patriarch) Abraham
two centuries previously.
</p>

<p>
The marvellous discoveries made in our day by Champollion,
Belzoni, and others, may be said to have thrown a new light
on the early history not only of Egypt but of the world!
Proofs the most startling have been brought to light of the
vast political power and high civilization of the Egyptian
nation, combined with a knowledge of science in many branches
scarcely surpassed in the present and not equalled in the last
generation of European nations! In the Egyptian paintings
we have the most distinct portraits, representing not only
Negroes, Jews, and other neighbouring races, but also of
nations whose light complexions, peculiar physiognomy, and
equipments, combined as they sometimes are with delineations
of the costumes or natural productions of the countries
of which they were natives, betoken the inhabitants of more
northern latitudes, confirming the account of Tacitus, who
states <q>The Egyptians overran all Libya and Ethiopia, and
subdued the Medes and Persians, the Bactrians and
Scythians, with the extensive regions inhabited by the
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
Syrians, the Armenians, and the Cappadocians; and by
this conquest a tract of country extending from Bithynia
on the Pontic Sea to the coast of Syria on the Mediterranean
was reduced to subjection.</q>
</p>

<p>
The evidence seems to be clear that some of the nations
with whom the Egyptian armies fought, may be identified
with the principal Asiatic nations still inhabiting the borders
of the Caspian.
</p>

<p>
<q>On six of the Phonetic Ovals (published by Champollion)
are the names of the heads of the various countries conquered
by Sesostris. On one appears the generic name of
the Scheti (spelt Sh.e.d.te); on the second, the generic
name of the sons of Mosech or the Muscovites, spelt precisely
as in the Hebrew (M.s.ek); thirdly, the people of
Arakan, spelt very nearly as that name is sounded (as, for
example, Ar-rk-k-a-n); fourthly, the people of Casan (spelt
C-a-s-n); the fifth is probably Susa, but the middle vowel is
omitted, and it stands S-se.</q><note place='foot'>Foreign Quarterly, 1836. I conceive, however, that the conclusion of the
ingenious reviewer as to the identity of M.s.e.k with the name of the Muscovites,
may require reconsideration.  See Adelung on the Russians, and Vol. I,
p. 314.</note>
</p>

<p>
Casan is a Tartar province, conquered by Russia in the
16th century.
</p>

<p>
The Scheti, according to Champollion's opinion, were the
Scythians of the classical nations, the modern Tartars.<note place='foot'>Adelung.</note>
</p>

<p>
A conflict between the Egyptians and the Scheti or Scheta
forms the subject of one of the most interesting Egyptian
battle-pieces, which displays in a striking point of view the
high military discipline of the Egyptians. Mr. Wilkinson
describes the Scheti <q>as a nation who had made considerable
progress in military tactics, both with respect to manœuvres
in the field and the art of fortifying towns, some of which
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
they surrounded with a double fosse. It is worthy of remark,
that in these cases the approach to the place led over
a bridge; and the sculptures acquainting us with the fact
are highly interesting, as they offer us the earliest indication
of its use, having been executed in the reign of the great
Ramesis, about 1350 years before our era.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<q>Their arms were the bow, sword, and spear, and a wicker
shield.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<q>They had some cavalry, but large masses of infantry with
a formidable body of chariots, constituted the principal
force of their numerous and well-appointed army; and if
from the manner in which they posted their corps-de-reserve
we may infer them to have been a people skilled in war,
some idea may also be formed of the strength of their army
from the numbers composing that division, which amounted
to 24,000 men, drawn up in three close phalanxes, consisting
each of 8,000.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mr. Wilkinson notices three other nations among those
who were connected with the Egyptians either as enemies
or allies, viz. <q>The Rebo,</q> <q>The Shairetana,</q> and <q>The
Tok-kari.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Rebo were among the most formidable enemies of the
Egyptians. They were distinguished by a light complexion,
blue eyes, an aquiline nose, and a costume very like that of
Persia or Parthia, indicating a northern as well as an
Asiatic country; they wore earrings, and their chiefs sometimes
tattoed their arms and legs; they appear as the type
of Asia in some of the Egyptian drawings. Their chief
weapons were a long straight sword, with a sharp point, and
a bow. Champollion concluded the Rebo to have been the
Parthians.
</p>

<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>

<p>
Mr. Wilkinson expresses himself unable to trace the
Shairetana and the Tok-kari; I conceive, however, that their
names and other circumstances serve to identify them with
the Sogdians or Bucharians and the Turks, whose territories
are intermingled. The name of the Tok-kari obviously resembles
that of the Turks, and, according to Adelung, the
Bucharians, from their dwelling in Towns, &amp;c., are called
Sarti, a name resembling that of the Shairetana. The
Shairetana and Tok-kari revolted together against the
Egyptians, and were again subdued. The Tok-kari used
waggons with two solid wheels, and drawn by two oxen,
which appear to have been placed in the rear as in the
Scythian or Tartar armies. Their women are seen carrying
off their children by drawing them into these waggons at the
moment of defeat. These are traits characteristic of the
Tartar race, of which the Turks are a branch. These nations
were occasionally allied with the Egyptians both against the
Scheti and the Rebo, which implies that their country was intermediate
between that of the Parthians and the Tartars.
</p>

<p>
The Egyptian illustrations of Scriptural incidents and localities
are of the highest interest:
</p>

<p>
Champollion found a portrait of a Hebrew, with all the
features of the race, in a group consisting of the chiefs of
thirty conquered nations, whom an Egyptian King is depicted
dragging to the feet of the Theban Trinity. The
name of the Egyptian King was phonetically written
<q>Shishak,</q> the name of the Jewish captive was written
<q>Joudaha Melek,</q> King of Judea or the Jews. (See I. Kings,
14 chap. 25 and 26 v.) This picture, as Mr. Tattam<note place='foot'>Tattam's Egyptian Grammar.</note> observes,
may be considered as a commentary on this chapter!
</p>

<p>
Portraits of Jews are frequent amongst the Egyptian remains.
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
<q>The costume of these Jews is always the same.
They wear their black bushy hair occasionally bound by a
red fillet; but sometimes they wear hats not unlike the
hats dramatically assigned to the Jews of the dark ages.
They wear sandals, the military petticoat or philibeg, a
baldric crossing one shoulder, a girdle, to which is attached
a short sword or dagger, and when engaged in warlike operations,
having the upper part of the body covered with a
defensive coat, either of leather or armour, and wearing
above the whole a tippet like the cape of a great coat. Independent
of Phonetic language a mere glance at their
lineaments shows that they are Jews!</q><note place='foot'>Foreign Quarterly Review.</note>
</p>

<p>
The early development of the vast political power and high
civilization of this extraordinary people corroborates the conclusion,
that the origin of the Egyptian nation must be referred
to a period sufficiently remote to render it extremely
improbable that a close specific resemblance should have continued
to exist between their language and those of the
countries from which the first population of Egypt may have
emigrated. This inference does not militate against the supposition
that Egypt may have been first colonized from the
contiguous Semetic or Syro-Phœnician regions of Judæa and
Arabia.<note place='foot'>There is an able pamphlet by Dr. Löewe, in which he maintains the Hebrew
to be the Parent of the Egyptian. Dr. Löewe's examples appear to me to be
equally conclusive <emph>against</emph> the specific connexion he advocates, and <emph>in support</emph> of
the original unity of these tongues at a remote era.</note>
</p>

<p>
The literature of ancient Egypt forms a treasure as yet
but imperfectly explored. <q>We possess,</q> says Dr. Lepsius,
Hieratic MSS. as far back as the flourishing epoch of the
eighteenth dynasty, (which began to reign B.C. 1575, i.e.
eighty years before the departure of the Israelites,) and it
is probable that this style was in use even earlier. We
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
have MSS. on History, Astrology, Magic, <q><hi rend='italic'>Registres de
Comptabilities</hi>,</q> and especially a great quantity of MSS. on
Funeral matters.
</p>

<p>
These remains are probably pregnant with information of
the profoundest interest with regard to the early history of
mankind! Further inquiries similar to those conducted by
Dr. Lepsius with respect to the phases through which the
Egyptian Tongue has passed, will probably bring to light
numerous proofs of an increasing approximation in its most
ancient specimens to the languages of Asia and also to
those of the other regions of the continent of Africa. Even
in the present state of our knowledge, I may point out that
indications are not altogether wanting that the Hebrew and
other Semetic Tongues in some respects appear to form a
connecting link between the Egyptian and other African
languages, on the one hand, and the Sanscrit and other languages,
termed Indo-European, on the other. These indications
occur not in the words but in the structure of the
Semetic Tongues.
</p>

<p>
In explaining the origin of language, I have noticed that
the basis or Root of the Noun and Verb is the same, while
the requisite distinction between the different parts of speech
is made by appropriate additions, as in the instance of the
syllable Er, in Build-er.
</p>

<p>
It may be inferred that all additions now employed grammatically
as prefixes or suffixes were in the first instance
used indifferently either before or after the Root. But we
find, in this respect, a marked difference between the Indo-European
and the Egyptian Tongues. In the former, these
grammatical agents are almost invariably placed after, while
in the Egyptian they in some instances follow, and in others
precede the Root. It will be evident, however, that these
grammatical forms themselves are, in numerous important
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
instances, the same in these two Classes of Tongues, and that
it is only the order in which they are placed that is different.
Thus, in forming the feminine from the masculine, the
Egyptians used a prefix, Th, which forms a suffix in the
Welsh, as in Son,<note place='foot'>Compare Sohn (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>), Son (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>).</note> <q>A Brother,</q> Th-son, <q>A Sister,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)
Gen-eth, <q>A Girl,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>) Again, the Egyptian plural is
formed by prefixing N, as in Phe, Heaven, singular; N Pheou,
Heavens, plural, (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>,) while in many of the Indo-European
tongues plurals are often formed by subjoining N,
as in Ox, Ox-en (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>), Ych, Ych-en (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.), &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Now in the Hebrew, Chaldee, &amp;c., though suffixes are employed
in numerous instances, formative prefixes are also
used, though not so generally as in the Egyptian, between
which language and the Indo-European tongues the Semetic
languages therefore occupy, in this respect, an intermediate
place.
</p>

<p>
There is, I conceive, pretty distinct evidence that these
characteristic peculiarities of the three classes of Tongues
just adverted to are results of comparatively recent conventional
changes. For a proof that the above noticed formative
of the plural was at one time prefixed, as well as affixed, in
the Indo-European Tongues,&mdash;see, as regards the Sanscrit,
the word Nara, corresponding with the Egyptian, p. 129;&mdash;as
regards the Welsh, see Appendix A, p. 38. On the other
hand, Dr. Lepsius's researches have furnished me with a
decisive example of an approximation in the ancient Egyptian
to the Indo-European method. <q>In the age of Hieroglyphics,</q>
he observes, <q>the feminine termination Th,</q> above noticed,
<q>always follows, while in Coptic it always precedes the
Noun.</q>
</p>

<p>
Changes of this nature may be considered trifling in themselves;
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
but they will be found to afford an explanation, at
once simple and comprehensive, of the most striking of those
features which separate, by differences supposed to be fundamental,
the languages of the Egyptian and Syro-Phœnician
races from those of the other families of mankind. In grammatical
arrangement the African languages are supposed for
the most part to agree with the Egyptian.<note place='foot'>See Dr. Prichard on Man.</note>
</p>

<p>
In physiological characteristics it has been very distinctly
established, by the interesting researches of Dr. Prichard,
that the Egyptian or Coptic race forms a connecting link
between the contiguous Asiatic nations and the Negroes of
the interior of Africa. It is worthy of remark, that Vater<note place='foot'>Mithridates, under Africa.</note>
notices the projection of the nether jaw, <q>Unterkiefer,</q> as a
characteristic trait of the Jewish nation! It is observable
that this is a point of approximation to the African nations!
</p>

<p>
<q>If we may form an idea,</q> says Dr. Prichard, <q>of the
complexion of the Egyptians from the numerous paintings
found in their temples, and in splendidly decorated tombs,
in some of which the colours are known to be preserved in
a very fresh state, we must conclude that this people were
of a red-copper, or light chocolate colour, and that they
resembled the reddest of the Fúlah and Kafir tribes now
existing in Africa. This colour may be seen in the numerous
plates in the <q>Description de l'Egypte,</q> and in the
coloured figures given by Belzoni. A similar complexion
is represented on the heads of the cases made of the
sycamore-wood, which answer the purpose of sarcophagi,
and in almost all Egyptian figures. This red colour is
evidently intended to represent the complexion of the
people, and is not put on in the want of a lighter paint, or
flesh-colour, for when the limbs or bodies are represented
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
as seen through a thin veil, the tint used resembles the
complexion of Europeans. The same shade might have
been generally adopted if a darker one had not been preferred,
as more truly representing the national complexion
of the Egyptian race.<note place='foot'>See Belzoni's Travels, p. 239.</note> Female figures are sometimes distinguished
by a yellow or tawny colour.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Speaking of the Copts, Volney says that they have a yellowish,
dusky complexion, neither resembling the Grecian
nor Arabian. He adds, that they have a <emph>puffed visage</emph>,
<emph>swoln eyes</emph>, <emph>flat</emph> nose, and <emph>thick lips</emph>, <emph>and bear much resemblance
to Mulattoes</emph>.</q> I have already cited Baron Larrey's
description of the Copts, the principal traits of which are,
<q>a full countenance, a long aperture of the eyelids&mdash;<q>coupés
en amand,</q>&mdash;projecting cheek-bones, dilated nostrils, thick
lips, and hair and beard black and crisp. M. Pugnet, an
intelligent physician and an ingenious and discriminating
writer, has made an attempt to distinguish the Copts, or
Qoubtes, as he terms them, into two divisions, those whose
ancestry has been intermixed, and partly of Greek and
Latin descent, and a class of purely Egyptian origin. He
says that nothing is more striking than the contrast between
the small and meagre Arabs and the large and fine stature
of the Qoubtes. <q>A l'extérieur chêtif et misérable des premières,
ceux-ci opposent un air de majesté et de puissance;
à la rudesse de leurs traits, une affabilité soutenue; à leur
abord inquiet et soucieux, une figure très épanouie.</q></q><note place='foot'>Prichard on Man.</note>
</p>

<p>
A few further examples of the connexion of the Egyptian
with other languages are subjoined. O n h, <q>A Dwelling,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>,) Wohn-ung, Wohn-en (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>), Onh, <q>To live,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Eg.</hi>,) Ōn (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)&mdash;Shage, <q>A Word, a Discourse,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eg.</hi>,)
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
Sage, Sag-en (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>), Say (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>). The <q>Sagas</q> of the
Gothic nations are venerable Oral traditions!&mdash;Hinim, <q>Sleep,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Eg.</hi>,) Heen (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)&mdash;Eshau, <q>A Sow, or Swine,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eg.</hi>,)
Hus (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), Sow (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>)&mdash;Iri, <q>To do,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eg.</hi>,) a formative
expressive of Action; Aud-ire, <q>To hear,</q> Ire, <q>To go,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Lat.</hi>)&mdash;Ra.ma,
<q>Lofty,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eg.</hi>,) R.ou.m (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)&mdash;Phath, <q>Foot,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Eg.</hi>,) Pes, Ped-is (<hi rend='italic'>Lat.</hi>), Path (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>)&mdash;E h e, <q>An Ox,</q>
Ehēou, <q>Oxen,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eg.</hi>,) Ych, Ych-en (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)&mdash;Ma, <q>A Place,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Eg.</hi>,) Ma (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
</p>

</div>

<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. On The Chinese Language.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>High Antiquity of the Chinese Empire and Remains discredited
by Sir William Jones and Adelung. But the Differences
between the Chinese Language and those of Western Asia
more ancient than the peculiarities which distinguish the
African Languages from those of Europe and Western
Asia. These Differences not fundamental. Identity of
the Chinese with the Hebrew and with the English and
other European Languages, &amp;c.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
Adelung, like Sir William Jones before him, quite discredits
the supposed antiquity of the Chinese Empire and
the claims set up by the Chinese to a high and ancient civilization.
The Great Wall, said by their historians to have
been built 240 years <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, is not mentioned by early writers,
especially Marco Polo, who visited China from the West
in 1270. He regards the scientific knowledge of the Chinese
as inferior to that of several adjoining nations, and Confucius's
morality as nothing better than a medley of sound opinions,
such as any man of strong sense might have compiled! The
materials of their paper are so frail that it is impossible any
of their MSS. can be very ancient, and in the fidelity or
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
knowledge of their Transcribers he places no confidence!
Finally, he views the infantine character of their language, a
feature in which the Chinese are inferior to the wildest
American tribes, as forming in itself a proof of the absence
of a high culture, to which, he maintains, it constitutes an
almost insuperable obstacle.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, unfavorable as its characteristics are to
the supposed antiquity and extent of their civilization, he
nevertheless considers these very peculiarities of their language
in the light of decisive proofs of the high antiquity of
the Chinese nation, viewed simply as a distinct branch of the
human race.
</p>

<p>
In the last chapter were discussed the peculiarities of
structure which distinguish the Egyptian and Semetic
tongues from those of the Indo-European class; peculiarities
which were shown to consist, not in a fundamental difference
of elements, but simply in various conventional arrangements
of the same elements. This explanation will now be proved
to apply also to the characteristics which distinguish the
Chinese from the principal Asiatic and European languages,
with this qualification however, that these characteristics, as
contrasted with those of other classes of tongues, imply a
separation from a parent stock at a much earlier era in the
history of the human species than those which have been
noticed in the last chapter, as distinguishing the Indo-European,
Semetic, and Egyptian languages respectively.
</p>

<p>
According to Adelung's lucid analysis, the following are
the principal steps by which language is formed. 1. The
first words are vowels, or sounds produced simply by the
opening of the mouth and the emission of the breath.
2. Next in order are monosyllables, consisting of a vowel
and a consonant preceding, as in P-a. 3. Arise monosyllables,
formed of a vowel between two or more consonants,
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
as in P-a-p. 4. Lastly are constructed polysyllabic words,
formed by a combination into one word of two or more of the
monosyllabic terms.
</p>

<p>
The African, American,<note place='foot'>The The African languages (as far as they are known to us), and the American,
according to Du Ponceau, are all polysyllabic.</note> European, and all the Asiatic
languages, with the exception of those spoken in China and
the contiguous countries of the south-west of Asia, display a
consummation of all these four stages. The Chinese exhibits
results of the first and second steps of the series only. In
other words, the Chinese may be described not simply as a
language <emph>purely monosyllabic</emph>, but as one in which the
<emph>monosyllables are of the most elementary and infantine character,
viz., those which consist of one consonant and a vowel</emph>
(<emph>as in</emph> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Pa</hi>). They have no words which have a second consonant,
as in <hi rend='smallcaps'>P-a-p</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Having no polysyllables, the Chinese supply their place
by a minute variety in their vowel sounds. They have no
grammar:<note place='foot'>To this rule, however, pronouns are an exception.</note> the same word is at once an adjective, a substantive,
and a verb! Affixes and suffixes, such as occur in
give, giv-er, gif-t, are unknown. The modifications of meaning
these forms convey are expressed either by altering the
position of the words or by additional terms. The plural is
the same as the singular; though, to avoid obscurity, in
extreme cases the clumsy expedient of repetition is resorted
to, as in Tschin-tschin, <q>Man-man</q> (i.e. Men); or distinct
words indicative of number are prefixed, such as Muen,
<q>Many,</q> Tschung, <q>All!</q>
</p>

<p>
It was the opinion of Adelung that the Chinese language
differed not merely in its structure, but in its elements, from
the other languages of the human race. He supposed this
nation to have sprung from the same stock as those of western
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
Asia. But their speech he conceives to have been
constructed after the separation.
</p>

<p>
The peculiar monosyllabic structure of the Chinese seems
to justify the conclusion, that the nations of Europe and
western Asia are more nearly allied in descent to the Negro
tribes of the interior of Africa and to the Indian tribes of
America than they are to the Chinese and the nations of the
contiguous countries of the south-west of Asia. But that
Adelung's conclusion, that the Chinese is a radically distinct
tongue is an erroneous one will now be shown by examples,
to which the <emph>peculiar structure of that language will only
serve to give additional<note place='foot'>Numerous examples also occur in <ref target='Appendix_A'>Appendix A</ref>.</note> force</emph>; for while in most of the
following examples the words compared are essentially the
same, the Chinese monosyllables being identical with Hebrew
or European monosyllables, or with terms which partake of
that character, in other instances it will be found that the
differences which occur have been caused solely by the
addition of the characteristic suffixes and affixes of the polysyllabic
languages, which are not used in the Chinese! Thus
we have Mu, <q>A Mouse,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chin.</hi>,) Mū-s, Mu-os, Mu (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>),
the root in the latter being the same as in the former; Fo
and Foo Tsin, <q>A Fa-ther,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chin.</hi>,) Moo and Moo Tsin,
<q>A Mo-ther,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chin.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
I shall commence these examples with the Chinese pronouns,
most of which are absolutely identical with those of
the polysyllabic languages. This branch of the comparison
will serve to place in a striking point of view the erroneous
nature of the opinion generally received among philologists,
that nations which agree are necessarily more nearly allied than
those which differ<note place='foot'>Cæteris paribus, this is a correct view; but not where grammatical resemblances
are treated as more important evidence than other resemblances.</note> in their grammatical forms, the Chinese
being found in this respect to agree in an unequivocal manner
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
with the kindred English and German, in some of those
very points in which they mutually differ widely!
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Pronouns of the First Person</hi>, <q>I</q> and <q>We.</q>&mdash;Ngan,
Ngoo Ngo, <q>I</q> and <q>We,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese.</hi>) Iōnga, Egōn, <q>I,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Pronouns of the Second Person</hi>, <q>Thou</q> and <q>Ye.</q>&mdash;Irr,
<q>Thou</q> and <q>Ye,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese.</hi>) Ihr, <q>Ye,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>) Yú,
Yŏh, <q>Thou</q> and <q>Ye,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese.</hi>) You, <q>Ye,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)
Yō (<hi rend='italic'>Provincial English</hi>). Eoh (<hi rend='italic'>Anglo-Saxon</hi>), <q>Ye.</q> Nee,
Nai, Nyú, <q>Thou</q> and <q>Ye,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese.</hi>) Ne, <q>You,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Mandans, a North American Tribe.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
In these instances the English <q>You</q> and the German
<q>Ihr</q> differ totally. Moreover, in each language separately
considered the plural differs altogether from the singular,
which in German is expressed by <q>Du,</q> and in the English
by <q>Thou.</q> The Chinese, which uses these terms, <q>Ihr</q> and
<q>You,</q> conjointly and in both numbers, furnishes a satisfactory
clue to these anomalies!
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Pronouns of the Third Person.</hi>&mdash;E.e, <q>He,</q> <q>She,</q> <q>It,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Chinese.</hi>) E.ee.a, E.v.e, (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>) He, masculine,
(<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>) He, feminine, (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)&mdash;Peé, <q>He,</q> <q>She,</q> <q>It,</q>
also <q>That,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese.</hi>) Phe, Ph, <q>This,</q> <q>That,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)
Pha or Pe, the article <q>The,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Specimens of Chinese Words, identical with equivalent Terms
in the Languages of Europe and Western Asia, &amp;c.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Keuen, <q>A Dog,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>), Kuōn (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), Coun (Plural,
<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>), Can-is (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>).&mdash;Ma, <q>A Horse,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>), Morin
Mantschu), Mä-hre (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>), Ma-re (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>), Ma-rch
(<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.)&mdash;Mu, <q>A Mouse,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>), Mu-s, Mu-os Mu
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
(<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), Mu-s (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)&mdash;Lung,<note place='foot'>The occurrence of nasal sounds at the end of words, as in this instance, form
an apparent exception to the principle that Chinese words consist simply of one
consonant followed by a vowel. But these nasals Adelung states to be mere
evanescent intonations.</note> <q>A Wolf,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>), Lukon
(<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), Lloun-og, <q>A Fox,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)&mdash;Ioanģ, Iong, Io,
<q>A Sheep,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>), Oin (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), Oen, <q>A Lamb,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>),
Oi, Ai, Yi (<hi rend='italic'>Irish.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
Foò <q>A Father,</q> Moo <q>A Mother;</q> also Foò Tsin <q>A
Father,</q> and Moó Tsin <q>A Mother.</q> Tsin means <q>A Relation,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Chinese.</hi>) The equivalent terms in the English and
other Gothic dialects consist of the Chinese root, and a
distinct suffix (answering the purpose of the separate Chinese
word Tsin.) Fä-der (<hi rend='italic'>Anglo-Saxon</hi>), Fa-ther (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>),
Fa-ter (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>), Mo-ther, (English), Mua-ter (<hi rend='italic'>Old high
German.</hi>)<note place='foot'>Adelung, notwithstanding his opinion that the Chinese is a perfectly distinct
language, was struck with the analogy between <q>Foo Tsin,</q> and <q>Moo
Tsin,</q> and <q>Fa-ther</q> and <q>Mo-ther.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
Nan and Yin, <q>A Man,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese.</hi>) Ninetz, <q>Men,</q> their
national name, (<hi rend='italic'>Samoieds.</hi>) Ninnee Inin, <q>A Man,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn
Dialects of N. America.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
Nan <q>A Son,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) N.n [Parturio] (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)&mdash;Neang,
<q>A young Lady,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Non (<hi rend='italic'>Mantschu</hi>,) Nonn-us (<hi rend='italic'>Lat.</hi>,)
Nun, <q>Tender,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese.</hi>)&mdash;Nyu, <q>A Daughter,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,)
Nea, Feminine, <q>Young,</q> [Juvenis] (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>,) New (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>)&mdash;Chan,
<q>To produce, bear,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Gen-i (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>,) Genn-ao
(<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)&mdash;Chuen, <q>A Boat, or Ship,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Kahn (<hi rend='italic'>Ger.</hi>,)
Cymba (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>,) Kumbī (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
Chuy, <q>To blow, The Breath,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Chwa (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)&mdash;Fe,
<q>Fat,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>), Fe-tt (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>,) Fa-t (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)&mdash;Ho,
<q>Fire,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Ho-t (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>) These words Ho-t and
Fe-tt seem to have been regularly formed as past participles
from Ho and Fe, the roots preserved in the Chinese.&mdash;Hoo,
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
<q>To escort,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Hü-ten (<hi rend='italic'>Ger.</hi>)&mdash;Fan, <q>To subvert,
Contrary,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Ph.n.e, [To turn, turn out] (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,)
Fun, <q>To divide,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Fun do, Fin do (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>.)&mdash;Gan,
<q>Favor,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Gönn-en, Gun-st (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>,) Gynn a
(<hi rend='italic'>Swedish</hi>,) c'H.n (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.)&mdash;Gaou, <q>Proud,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,)
Ga, Ga.ou.e, Ga.ee.oun (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>) Gang <q>Lofty,</q> Ge
<q>The Forehead,</q> Ke <q>To rise,</q> Ka.ou <q>High,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,)
Ga-e, <q>To rise,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)&mdash;Kang, <q>More,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Chwaneg
(<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.)&mdash;Hae, <q>A large River, The Sea,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Aa
(<hi rend='italic'>Icelandic</hi>,) Eia (<hi rend='italic'>Ang.-Sax.</hi>,) Wy (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.)&mdash;Heuen, <q>To
explain,</q> Heaou <q>To understand,</q> Heo <q>To learn,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,)
c'Hou.e <q>To show, explain, declare,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,) He-ar (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>)&mdash;Hwō,
<q>Living,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>) c'Hee.a, E.ou.e (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.)&mdash;Kwae,
<q>Prompt, active,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Chwae (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.)&mdash;Kia
<q>A Family,</q> Kiwo <q>A Nation,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Kiw (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>,)
Gou.e (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)&mdash;Keen, <q>To see,</q><note place='foot'>It is observable, that as in the above instances of Heuen and Keen, the
Chinese verbs very commonly terminate in a nasal <hi rend='italic'>n</hi>, as do those of the Persian
and Teutonic.</note> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>), Ken (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>,)
Kee, <q>And,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Kai (<hi rend='italic'>Greek and Algonquyn Tribes of
N. America</hi>,) King <q>To respect,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Kun-ēō (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>,)
Kwăn, <q>Fatigued,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chin.</hi>,) Gwan (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.)&mdash;Laou, <q>Labour,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) La.e (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>), La-bor (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>.)&mdash;Mae, <q>To buy,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Emo (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>.)&mdash;Lo, <q>Green,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) L.c'he,
(<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.)&mdash;Leo, <q>Small,</q> Lu, (<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>,) Low (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>.)&mdash;Muen,
<q>Many,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Many (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>.)&mdash;Yaou Yo, <q>To
will, desire,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Aeō (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>,) Aveo (<hi rend='italic'>Lat.</hi>)&mdash;Meen, <q>To
dispose,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) M.n.e (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.)&mdash;Mien, <q>The Face,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Mine (<hi rend='italic'>French</hi>,) Mien (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>.)&mdash;Pew, <q>Spotted
Tiger,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Pie [Colour] (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>,) Pei, <q>To receive,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Piai, <q>To possess,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.)&mdash;Pin, <q>Poor,</q> Penuria
(<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>.)&mdash;Sae, <q>To agitate,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Sway (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>.)&mdash;Saou,
<q>A Brush,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Shoue, <q>To rub,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>.)&mdash;Scun,
<q>To inspect,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Sehen (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>.)&mdash;Sha, <q>To
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
kill,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Sha.e (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)&mdash;Shen, <q>Good, Pious,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Sanctus (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>,) Shin, <q>A Spirit, God,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese.</hi>)&mdash;Shing,
<q>To ascend,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Scan-deo (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)&mdash;Shwa,
<q>To sport, Play,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Sho sho (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,) Soo, <q>To
number,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Shou e (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)&mdash;Sung, <q>To present to,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Schenk-en (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>)&mdash;Sing, <q>A Star,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,)
Schein-en, <q>To shine,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>,) Sun (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)&mdash;Yun,
<q>Fog, Cloud,</q> Ying, <q>Shadow,</q> Wan, <q>Evening,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,)
On.n, <q>A Cloud, To cloud over,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)&mdash;Wang, <q>To
hope.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Chwannawg, <q>Desirous,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)&mdash;We,
<q>Taste,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>,) Chwae-th (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
</p>

</div>

<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. On The Origin Of The American Tribes.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Identity of the American Tribes with the Nations of the other
Continents. High Mental and Moral qualities of the
North American Indians. Views of Cooper, Du Ponceau,
and Catlin. Clear nature of the proofs derivable from
Language of the Identity of the N. A. Indians with the
European and Asiatic Nations. Catlin's views as to the
Identity of the Mandans, a Tribe of N. A. Indians, with
the Welsh. Union in the Dialects of the N. A. Indians,
of Greek, and other Indo-European and Tartar Inflections,
with the Pronouns of the Hebrew and the Welsh. Close
Approximation of these Dialects to the Greek and other
European Tongues, and to the Languages of the North
of Europe and Asia.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
That the Tribes of the American Continent are descended
from the same stock as the Asiatic and European nations is
a proposition with respect to which the evidence contained
in Appendix A must, I conceive, be felt to be conclusive when
combined with Dr. Prichard's proofs that the Physiology of
the Human race in different countries is the result of climate
and other external agencies. As regards the mental and
moral qualities of the native American nations, there seems
to be no solid ground for the inference maintained in some
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
quarters that they are a different, because in these respects
an inferior, race. It is impossible to peruse Mr. Catlin's
living picture of the manners and social habits of the North
American Indians without being deeply impressed with the
conviction that these Tribes, both intellectually and morally,
are as highly gifted by nature as those nations who have inherited
the blessings of a refined civilization. That the same
remark applies to the more Southern American populations,
such as the Mexicans and Peruvians, may be shown by an
appeal to numerous considerations. In this place, however,
I shall confine my observations to the Septs generally termed
North American Indians, the original inhabitants of the
United States and the regions in the same latitude. This
race of men has been thus described in a celebrated work of
fiction, which owes its chief interest to the vivid portraiture
it exhibits of Indian life and manners.<note place='foot'>Cooper's Last of the Mohicans.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>It is generally believed that the Aborigines of the
American continent have had an Asiatic origin. There are
many physical as well as moral facts which corroborate this
opinion, and some few that would seem to weigh against it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The colour of the Indian, the writer believes, is peculiar
to himself, and while his cheek-bones have a very striking
indication of a Tartar origin, his eyes have not. Climate
may have had great influence on the former, but it is difficult
to see how it can have produced the substantial difference
which exists in the latter. The imagery of the
Indian, both in his poetry and his oratory, is Oriental,
chastened, and perhaps improved, by the limited range of
his practical knowledge. He draws his metaphors from
the clouds, the seasons, the birds, the beasts, and the vegetable
world. In this, perhaps, he does no more than any
other energetic and imaginative race would do, being compelled
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
to set bounds to his fancy by experience; but the
North American Indian clothes his ideas in a dress that is
so different from that of the African for instance, and so
Oriental in itself as to be remarked. His language, too,
has the richness and sententious fulness of the Chinese.
He will express a phrase in a word, and he will qualify the
meaning of an entire sentence by a syllable; he will even
convey different significations by the simplest inflections of
the voice.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Philologists who have devoted much time to the study,
have said that there were but two or three languages, properly
speaking, among all the numerous tribes which formerly
occupied the country that now composes the United
States. They ascribe the known difficulty one people have
in understanding one another to corruptions and dialects.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The writer remembers to have been present at an interview
between two chiefs of the Great Prairies west of the
Mississippi, and when an interpreter was in attendance
who spoke both their languages. The warriors appeared
to be on the most friendly terms, and seemingly conversed
much together, yet, according to the account of the interpreter,
each was absolutely ignorant of what the other said.
They were of hostile tribes, brought together by the influence
of the American Government; and it is worthy of remark
that a common policy led them both to adopt the
same subject. They mutually exhorted each other to be of
use in the event of the chance of war throwing either of the
parties into the hands of his enemies. Whatever may be
the truth, as respects the root and the genius of the Indian
tongues, it is quite certain they are now so distinct in their
words as to possess most of the disadvantages of strange
languages; hence much of the embarrassment that has
arisen in learning their histories, and most of the uncertainty
which exists in their traditions.</q>
</p>

<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>

<p>
The traits of character embodied in this passage are not
those of an inferior, but of a highly acute and imaginative
race!
</p>

<p>
The Philological objections to the proposition that the
North American Tribes are of Asiatic origin have by many
writers been regarded as insuperable. Du Ponceau, who has
given profound attention to the subject, dwells, 1, On the differences
in words among the American languages themselves;
2, On the failure which he imputes to those writers who have
attempted to identify the Indians with some one individual
Asiatic nation, as the Chinese, the Tartars, or the Jews, &amp;c.;
and 3, On the differences in the Grammars of the North
American dialects and those of the languages of the Old
World, which he treats as a conclusive refutation of all arguments
in favour of original unity! Mr. Catlin also lays
great stress on the first of these considerations, viz. the great
differences he found in the words of the dialects of the Tribes
he visited.
</p>

<p>
To every one of these objections the general principles developed
in the previous pages will be found to involve a
complete answer. 1. The differences apparently fundamental
in the words of American languages may be accounted for in
the same manner as similar differences in the languages of
the old world (the Gothic and Celtic for example,) have
already been explained, viz. by the tendency to abandon different
synonymes. 2. That attempts to prove a close specific
relation between the North American dialects and any one
Asiatic language, such as the Chinese or the Hebrew, should
have failed, was to be expected as a consequence of the same
tendency. 3. Finally, differences of Grammar have been
shown to be fallacious evidence viewed separately and without
due regard to other features of language.<note place='foot'>See chapter on the Chinese.</note> Moreover, it will
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
presently appear clearly that, even as regards the Grammar
of the Indian Dialects, Du Ponceau's impressions can be
distinctly proved to be erroneous, an extended comparison
serving to render manifest the interesting fact that, as respects
the elements of Grammar, these dialects perfectly agree
with the Asiatic and European languages, while in the
mode of combining those elements, they do not differ from
those languages more widely than the latter differ among
themselves.
</p>

<p>
If the ancestors of the American Indians emigrated at a
remote period from the opposite Asiatic Coasts, we have no
right to anticipate in their dialects a complete conformity to
any one language of the old world, but general and varying
features of resemblance to several. The kindred dialects of
the same Continent after the lapse of a considerable time do
not exhibit any other kind of resemblance! Now this is the
species of relation which the North American Indian dialects
actually display when compared to the Languages of the Old
World!
</p>

<p>
The chief examples which I have selected as illustrations
of this proposition have been taken from the Algonquyn
dialects, the very class examined by Du Ponceau himself, to
which I have added a few corroborative instances from those
of the tribes of the regions to the west of the Mississippi which
have been lately described by Mr. Catlin. The dialects
termed Algonquyn by Du Ponceau were formerly spoken by
numerous tribes who, though not the sole inhabitants, were
originally spread through the whole of the present territory
of the United States, including the <q>Lenni Lenapé,</q> the
<q>Chippeways,</q> and other powerful septs.
</p>

<p>
With regard to this class of Indian Dialects I propose to
show: 1. That as regards Words they bear a close resemblance
to a great variety of Asiatic and European languages.
2. That their grammatical peculiarities, in like manner, combine
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
those of various languages of the Old World, as in the
instance of their Verbs and Pronouns, in which the inflections
of the Greek and other Indo-European Tongues are found
united with separate Pronouns identical with those common
to the Welsh on the one hand and the Hebrew and its
kindred Semetic dialects on the other.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words from the North American Indian Dialects of the
Algonquyn Class compared with analogous Terms in
Asiatic and European Languages.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Man ittou, <q>The Deity, a Spirit,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi> means, <hi rend='italic'>N. A. Indian</hi>. This term (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>) is used here exclusively to
distinguish words from the dialects of the Algonquyn class.</note>) Mouno he ka,
<q>Ghosts,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mandan</hi>,<note place='foot'>A Western Tribe visited by Mr. Catlin.</note>) Manes, <q>The Spirits of the Dead,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>,) Manus, <q>The Mind,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>,) Mēn, <q>The Mind,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>,) Mens, Ment-is (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>), Pata-maw-os, <q>The Deity,</q>
from Pata-maw-an, <q>To adore,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>,) Poth-ēmenai, <q>To
seek, or pray to,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Doric</hi>,) for Poth-ein (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), Peton, <q>To
worship,</q> Peta, <q>A Prayer,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Old High German</hi>,) Bet-en,
Bitte (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>); see, as to N'iou and Nioueskou, two remarkable
words for <q>The Deity,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>,) pages <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>.
For names of the Heavenly Bodies, see <ref target='Appendix_A'>Appendix A</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<q>Father,</q> Ooch, Oss (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Ozha (<hi rend='italic'>Sclavon.</hi>), Otze (<hi rend='italic'>Dalmatian</hi>),
Wosch (<hi rend='italic'>Lusatian</hi>), Otzie (<hi rend='italic'>Bohemian</hi>), Nosa (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>),
Niza, Niesee (<hi rend='italic'>Samoieds</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>Mother,</q> Anna (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Ana (<hi rend='italic'>Turkish</hi>), Anya (<hi rend='italic'>Hungarian</hi>),
Nanna (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Nain<note place='foot'>Nain (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>) Grandmother.</note> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>), Ningé (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Naing (<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>),
Nik, Nêkaoui (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), N.k.be<note place='foot'><q>A Woman.</q> See Parkhurst's Lex.</note> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>A Woman,</q> Panum, Phanem (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Banen (<hi rend='italic'>Cornish</hi>),
Been (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>), Pin, <q>A Female,</q> applied to animals, (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>.)
</p>

<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>

<p>
<q>A Girl,</q> Kan-isswah (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Gen eez (<hi rend='italic'>Pers.</hi>), Nunk-shoué,
Nunk<note place='foot'>Nunk (<hi rend='italic'>Indian</hi>) means <q>Young.</q></note> (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Neang (<hi rend='italic'>Chin.</hi>), Non (<hi rend='italic'>Mantschu</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>Husband,</q> Nap-é, Nap eem (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Nub-o, Nuptiæ (<hi rend='italic'>Lat.</hi>),
Nuptials (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>)&mdash;<q>Husband,</q> Weew-ehsa, Wasuk (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>),
<q>Wife,</q> Weewo, Weowika (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), <q>Marriage,</q> Wiwaha
(<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>), Wife (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<q>A little Child,</q> Awusk, Awash ish (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), <q>A Child,</q>
Watsah (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>), <q>Young,</q> Wuski (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), <q>A Youth,</q> Was
or Gwas (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>High,</q> Hockunk (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Hoch, Höhe, Hoheit (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>),
High, Height (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>), Hitké<note place='foot'>This word is from the dialects of the Iroquois, another class of Indian Tribes,
who inhabited the present territory of the United States.</note> (<hi rend='italic'>Iroquois</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>The Earth,</q> Hacki, Ki, Ackour (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Ge (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>),
Ager (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>), Agr-os (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>Foot,</q> Sit (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), St.o, <q>I stand,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>Good,</q> Wuilit (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Wohl (<hi rend='italic'>Ger.</hi>), Weal, Well, Wealth
(<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>), Ee.o.l, <q>To profit, benefit,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>To fight,</q> Pachg-amen<note place='foot'><q>War,</q> Aguwarrie, in the Iroquois dialects, Gewehr (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>), Guerre
(<hi rend='italic'>French</hi>), War (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>).</note> (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), P.g.ee (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>), Pug-no
(<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>To give,</q> Mekan (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), M.gn (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>Night,</q> Nukon (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Nux (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), Nox (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>), Noc
(<hi rend='italic'>Polish</hi>), Noc (<hi rend='italic'>Hungarian</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>Blood,</q> M'huk, Mokum (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Mucum, Mucus (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>Cold,</q> Kisina (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Kuisne, <q>Ice,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>,) K.sh.a,
<q>To harden, stiffen,</q> <q>A Cucumber,<note place='foot'>Parkhurst.</note> from its cooling properties,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>Sleep,</q> Nipu, Nip-awin, <q>To sleep,</q> Nupp (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Nap
(<hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>), Hup-nos (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), Nim pamino, <q>I sleep,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>),
N.m., N.ou.m.e (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>).
</p>

<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>

<p>
<q>To touch,</q> Aman damaog-an (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Man-us (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>Man,</q> Nin (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>), Ninetz <q>Men,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Samoieds</hi>,) a diminutive
race in the North-east of Asia. The national name they
have given to themselves is the above word, Ninetz <q>Men.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
I shall add a few further illustrations from the specimens
of the languages of the Indian Tribes to the West of the
United States, which have been published by Mr. Catlin.
</p>

<p>
<q>Spirits, Ghosts,</q> Mouno he ka (<hi rend='italic'>Mandan</hi>,)&mdash;and see
above, Manitto, <q>A Spirit,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ind.</hi>)&mdash;Manes, <q>The Spirits of
the Dead,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>Bad,</q> Khe cush (<hi rend='italic'>Mandan</hi>), Kakos (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>A Bear,</q> Mah to (<hi rend='italic'>Mandan</hi>), Matto (<hi rend='italic'>Sioux</hi>), Medve
(<hi rend='italic'>Hungarian</hi>), Medvid (<hi rend='italic'>Sclavonian</hi>), Metzwetz (<hi rend='italic'>Lusatian</hi>),
Koonoghk (<hi rend='italic'>Riccaree</hi>), Chiung (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>Dog,</q> Shonka (<hi rend='italic'>Riccaree</hi>), Shunah (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>), Shun
(<hi rend='italic'>Armenian</hi>), A meeteh (<hi rend='italic'>Blackfeet</hi>), Meda (<hi rend='italic'>Taraikai</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>North-east
of Asia</hi>), Madaidh (<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>A Raven,</q> Kaka (<hi rend='italic'>Mandan</hi>), To kah ka (<hi rend='italic'>Riccaree</hi>), Kaka
(<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>River,</q> Pass ahah (<hi rend='italic'>Mandan</hi>). See Appendix A. p. <ref target='PgApA078'>78</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ears,</q> Ookah nay<note place='foot'>Nakoha (<hi rend='italic'>Mandan</hi>), Noh gee (<hi rend='italic'>Sioux</hi>).</note> (<hi rend='italic'>Tuskaroras</hi>), Ucho (<hi rend='italic'>Sclavonian</hi>),
Ochtowaga (<hi rend='italic'>Shawannos</hi>), Ohto kiss (<hi rend='italic'>Blackfeet</hi>), Ōta
(<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>) See p. <ref target='PgApA073'>73</ref>, Appendix A.
</p>

<p>
<q>Hand,</q> Onka (<hi rend='italic'>Mandan.</hi>)  See Appendix, page <ref target='PgApA069'>69</ref>.
Ohahna (<hi rend='italic'>Tuskaroras.</hi>) See Appendix, p. <ref target='PgApA068'>68</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<q>Head,</q> Otahra (<hi rend='italic'>Tuskaroras</hi>), Otri (<hi rend='italic'>Ashantees Negroes</hi>),
Utieri (<hi rend='italic'>Aminas Negroes.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<q>Nose,</q> Pahoo (<hi rend='italic'>Mandan</hi>), Pei Pi (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>), Pah.soo
(<hi rend='italic'>Sioux</hi>), Ph.o.e, <q>To Breathe,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>), Phusa-o, <q>To
Breathe,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)
</p>

<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>

<p>
Want of space, and the extensive nature of the evidence
contained in Appendix A, alone deter me from greatly
multiplying these examples.
</p>

<p>
2. As regards Grammatical forms:
</p>

<p>
Nothing can be more erroneous than the inference that
the North American Indian dialects differ in this respect
from those of Asia and Europe. In the previous comparison
numerous examples present themselves in which the same
words unequivocally exhibit at once both the roots and the
inflections of words belonging to the languages termed Indo-European,
as in <hi rend='italic'>Patam-awan</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Patam-awos</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kis-ina</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>M. huk</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mok-um</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Khe-cush</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Nimp-amino</hi>, &amp;c.!
</p>

<p>
These are not isolated instances. I do not hesitate to
affirm that it may be shown by means of the very terms he
has selected for examination, that those North American
Indian dialects which Du Ponceau has analyzed, abound in
similar examples! That the same remark is true with regard
to the dialects of the Western Tribes described by Mr. Catlin,
is a proposition which will now be illustrated in a remarkable
instance!
</p>

<p>
Among the tribes with whom he resided this writer has
especially noticed a highly interesting sept, the Mandans, in
whose dialect he has pointed out a variety of instances of
close resemblance to the Welsh, which he has left to the
judgment of those who are conversant with that language.
On this subject I conceive there cannot be any difference of
opinion among those who are vernacularly acquainted with
the venerable tongue of the Cymry. Of the Mandan terms
selected by Mr. Catlin (which are subjoined below), the
majority must be admitted to present plain and unequivocal
features of resemblance, or rather of identity, to the equivalent
Welsh terms.
</p>

<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>

<p>
Now, it will be seen that of these<note place='foot'>They are chiefly composed of Pronouns, terms which form the basis of
Grammar.</note> examples of affinity the
greater number consist of terms which belong exclusively to
the province of Grammar!
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.5cm} p{1.5cm} p{1.5cm} p{1.8cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(15) lw(15) lw(15) lw(15)'">
<row><cell>English.</cell><cell>Mandan.</cell><cell>Welsh.</cell><cell>Other Asiatic And European Languages.</cell></row>
<row><cell>I.</cell><cell>Me.</cell><cell>Me.</cell><cell>Me (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Eng.</hi>),  Eme
(<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>You.</cell><cell>Ne.</cell><cell>Chwe.</cell><cell>Nee, (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>He.</cell><cell>E.</cell><cell>E.</cell><cell>E.ee.a, E.ou.e, or E.v.e,
<q>He, She, It,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>She.</cell><cell>Ea.</cell><cell>E, Hee.</cell><cell>Ea, <q>She,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>It.</cell><cell>Ount.</cell><cell>Hooyant, <q>They</q> (Plural.)<note place='foot'>Hooynt does not mean <q>It</q> in Welsh. In that language it is a plural and not
a singular, as Mr. Catlin supposes. This circumstance, however, does not render
the example less relevant, <q>Hooynt</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>) being clearly identical with the
terms from the Mandan, Turkish, &amp;c., with which it is compared above; for
pronouns, singular and plural, were originally the same words as they still are in
all cases in the Chinese, and in several instances in the above examples.</note></cell><cell>Onuh, <q>It, Him, Her,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Turkish.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>They.</cell><cell>Eonah, (Onúh ha, Honúh ha, <q>They,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Iroquois Dialects.</hi></cell>
  <cell>Nhou, <q>They,</q> Hyny, <q>Those.</q></cell>
  <cell>E.n.e,  <q>They,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>), Oona, <q>They,</q> also <q>He,
She, It,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mixed Indian Dialects of Asia</hi>.)</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>Ainah, Ont, Ent, (<hi rend='italic'>Endings
of the third person plural of Indo-European Verbs.</hi>)<note place='foot'>Dr. Prichard, Eastern Origin of Celts, p. 134.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell>We.</cell><cell>Noo.</cell><cell>Nee.</cell><cell>Nōi (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), Nou, Nc'hnou
(<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>No, or, There is not.</cell><cell>Megosh.<note place='foot'>This is an erroneous example, I conceive. <q>Megosh</q> is also a questionable
one.</note></cell><cell>Nagoes, Nage.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Head.</cell><cell>Pan.</cell><cell>Pen.</cell></row>
<row><cell>The Great Spirit.</cell><cell>Maho peneta.</cell><cell>Mawr<note place='foot'>Dr. Prichard, Eastern Origin of Celts.</note> Penaether Yysprid  Mawr.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>

<p>
By some of our countrymen it has been sanguinely maintained
that the descendants of a body of Welsh, who left
their country under Prince Madoc in the twelfth century,
may be still traced by affinities of language among the
North American Indian Tribes. Struck by the resemblances
he has detected, Mr. Catlin has been led to favour the same
conclusion, and to suggest that the Mandans may probably
be shown to be the descendants of the lost Cambrian Colony!
</p>

<p>
But the examples selected by this writer, however creditable
to his accuracy and research, do not tend, as he suggests, to
prove the existence of a specific connexion between the Welsh
and the Mandans! This will be evident from the words contained
in the right-hand column (which have been added by
the author of this work). An examination of the whole comparison
will serve to show clearly, that though in most of the
instances he has noticed the resemblance displayed by the
Mandan to the Welsh is a close one, in many of them it displays
an equally close affinity to the Latin and Greek, &amp;c.,
while in some&mdash;this North American Indian dialect totally
differs from the Welsh tongue, and at the same time agrees
with&mdash;other languages of the Old World. Many of those examples
which precede the Comparison are also illustrations
of the principle that the Mandan, like other North American
Indian dialects, exhibits a general resemblance to all, and
not a specific relation to any one of the Asiatic and European
tongues. Thus Khe cush, <q>Bad,</q> which is identical with the
Greek, but is totally unlike the Welsh, is a Mandan word!
</p>

<p>
The prevalent theory, that there exists a group of Indo-European
languages and nations&mdash;peculiarly connected among
themselves&mdash;peculiarly isolated from others&mdash;will, I conceive,
be found to be fallacious; and what is highly remarkable,
distinct proofs of its fallacy, as will presently be seen, are
derivable from the dialects of the North American Tribes!
</p>

<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>

<p>
The writers by whom this theory has been maintained have
overlooked, on the one hand, the numerous points of resemblance
which connect the Indo-European languages with
other Tongues; while, on the other hand, they have also
overlooked the numerous points of difference which they mutually
display. On a close investigation it will be evident
that it is only in the basis of their Grammars that any of the
ancient languages of Asia and Europe, even those which are
very nearly related, agree; they do not display an identity of
Grammatical forms! Compare, for example, the inflections
of the Verbs in the Latin and the Greek, and the numerous
points of difference which they exhibit in almost every tense,
combined with mere partial coincidences. That these remarks
are equally true of the relation displayed by the North
American Indian dialects compared to those of the Old
World will be apparent from the following examples, in which
it will be manifest that these dialects in their basis agree
with, and in their inflections and details only partially differ
from, the Asiatic and European languages!
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Present Tense of a Verb in two Dialects of the
Algonquyn Class.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell><q>Chippeway</q> Dialect.</cell><cell><q>Lenni Lenape</q> Dialect.</cell></row>
<row><cell>(Root) <hi rend='smallcaps'>Nond</hi>&mdash;<q>Understand.</q></cell>
  <cell>(Root) <hi rend='smallcaps'>Pend</hi>&mdash;<q>Understand.</q><note place='foot'>Compare Pend-o (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>).</note></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Singular.</hi></cell><cell><hi rend='italic'>Singular.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>N'-nond-OM.</cell><cell>N'-pend-AMEN.</cell></row>
<row><cell><q>I understand.</q></cell><cell><q>I understand.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>K'-nond-OM.</cell><cell>K'-pend-AMEN.</cell></row>
<row><cell><q>Thou understand-est.</q></cell><cell><q>Thou understand-est.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>---- -Nond-om.</cell><cell>---- -Pend-amen.</cell></row>
<row><cell><q>He understand-s.</q></cell><cell><q>He understand-s.</q></cell></row>
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
<row><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Plural.</hi></cell><cell><hi rend='italic'>Plural.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>N'-nond-AM-IN.</cell><cell>N'-pend-AMEN-EEN.</cell></row>
<row><cell><q>We understand.</q></cell><cell><q>We understand.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>K'-nond-AM.</cell><cell>K'-pend-AM-OHUMO.</cell></row>
<row><cell><q>Ye understand.</q></cell><cell><q>Ye understand.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>---Nond-UM-ÔG.</cell><cell>---Pend-AMEN-OWO.</cell></row>
<row><cell><q>They understand.</q></cell><cell><q>They understand.</q></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
It will be observed that the inflections of the Algonquyn
Verb, indicative of persons (corresponding to those in Leg-o,
Leg-is, Leg-it, <hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>), are <q>Om and Amen.</q> In another
form of the Algonquyn Verb, <q>Amo</q> is also used.
</p>

<p>
These forms, <q>Om, Amo, Amen,</q> are the common inflections
of the first person in all the Indo-European languages.
(See Dr. Prichard on the Eastern Origin of the Celtic
Nations, pp. 130, 136.) In the North American Indian
dialects it will be seen that they occur in all the three
persons. There are instances of the same kind in the Indo-European
Tongues for the Doric Greek Infinitive as in Poth-emen-ai,
<q>To desire,</q> and the Greek Passive Participle as in
Tupt-omen-os, Tupt-omen-e, <q>Struck,</q> are examples of the
application of <q>Amen or Omen</q> to any individual of the
Human Race, in other words, <emph>to all the three persons</emph>!
</p>

<p>
This inflection <q>Amen</q> exists in the Tartar dialects in the
first person, as in Bol-amen, <q>I am,</q> Bol-asin, <q>Thou art,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
The following are examples of its use for the first person
in the Greek:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Singular.</hi></cell><cell><hi rend='italic'>Plural.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Amen</hi>, used as an Inflection for <q>I.</q></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='italic'>Amen</hi>, used as an Inflection for <q>We.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>E-tupt</hi>-<hi rend='smallcaps'>omēn</hi>, <q>I was struck.</q></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='italic'>Tupt</hi>-<hi rend='smallcaps'>omen</hi>, <q>We strike.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Tupt-oi</hi>-<hi rend='smallcaps'>mēn</hi>, <q>Would that I
were struck.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ē-mēn</hi>, <q>I had been.</q></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ē-men</hi>, <q>We were.</q></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>

<p>
These examples will serve to illustrate the proposition
that in inflections and other grammatical details the North
American Indian dialects partially coincide with individual
Indo-European languages in the same manner as those languages
partially agree among themselves! It remains to be
pointed out that where these two groups of tongues differ,
the differences are such as time might have produced, and
that they have the same basis in common.
</p>

<p>
<q>Om, Amo, Amen,</q> are according to Dr. Prichard, pronouns
confused with the verb. It is an interesting fact,
that <q>Amo</q><note place='foot'>Many of those differences displayed by the North American Indian languages
among themselves, and as compared to those of Asia, which have been assumed by
many writers to be fundamental, consist of mere transitions of application agreeably
to Horne Tooke's principles; terms which appear as pronoun inflections in one
dialect, occurring as pronouns, or as words for <q>Man</q> in others, &amp;c. Thus we
have Rauha pronoun of the third person <q>He</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Iroquois.</hi>) Rehoje, <q>Man Homo,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Tarahumaran.</hi>) R.ch.e, Rou.e, <q>Life, Soul, Spirit, Breath,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew and
Arabic.</hi>)</note> is actually used as the separate pronoun of the
third person <q>He</q> in the dialect of the <q>Blackfeet,</q> one of
the N. American Indian Tribes to the west of the Mississippi
visited by Mr. Catlin! Now, as all pronouns were originally<note place='foot'>As to the identity of these inflections, <q>Om, Amo, Amen,</q> with pronouns
and nouns. (See Appendix A, pp. <ref target='PgApA053'>53-4</ref>.)</note>
nouns, names for a <q>Human Being,</q> (see p. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>,) words of this
class must have been in the first instance applied indifferently
to all the three Persons. But in the course of time&mdash;1, In some
languages different nouns were appropriated to different Persons,&mdash;the
most common noun being applied to the First;
(this accounts for the occurrence of <q>Amo Om Amen,</q> probably
forms of the most primitive<note place='foot'>These terms seem to consist of the first essays of the organs of articulation.
(See p. 105.)</note> noun&mdash;in the first Person of the
Indo-European languages!)&mdash;2, In other tongues supplementary
pronouns were used to mark the requisite distinction
of Persons, the most common nouns being still used agreeably
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
to previous habit,&mdash;(though no longer of practical service)&mdash;in
combination with the verb; (this is the case in the
Algonquyn dialects in which the same inflection is repeated
in all the three persons, and the requisite distinction of persons
is made by means of pronoun prefixes or supplementary pronouns,
a distinction which, in the Greek, &amp;c., is made by
varying the final inflections or original pronouns, as in
<q>Tupt-oi-mēn, Tupt-oi-o,</q> &amp;c.)<note place='foot'>Ki-nondonim-i, <q>I,</q> or <q>We understand you,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn dialects.</hi>)
Compare Eimi, Tupt-oi-mi, &amp;c. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>) Bha va-mi (Sans.) &amp;c.
Compare <q>Amo,</q> with <q>I Am,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>,) &amp;c.</note>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The pronoun prefixes of these North American Indian
dialects, which as previously intimated, are common to the
Welsh and the Hebrew, and other Semetic tongues remain
to be noticed.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Algonquyn Pronoun Prefixes.</hi>
</p>

<p>
(See previous specimens of Algonquyn Verbs.)
</p>

<p>
N' <q>I</q> and <q>We.</q>
</p>

<p>
This is an abbreviated form used in conjunction with the
verb as a prefix. The pronoun in full is Ni Nin <q>I,</q> Ninou
<q>We.</q> Both the pronoun itself and the abbreviated form in
which it is used as a prefix, occur in the Hebrew in which
the latter is used as a suffix!
</p>

<p>
This Algonquyn pronoun is identical with an Algonquyn
word for <q>A Man,</q> which, it will be observed, renders the
proofs of affinity between the Semetic and Algonquyn dialects
in this instance complete.
</p>

<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2cm} p{2cm} p{2cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Algonquyn.</cell><cell>Semetic.</cell><cell>Welsh.</cell></row>
<row><cell><q>Man.</q></cell><cell><q>I,</q> or <q>Me.</q></cell><cell><q>I,</q> or <q>Me.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>Anini.<note place='foot'>See Appendix A, p. <ref target='PgApA056'>56</ref>, for the origin of this word.</note></cell><cell>A.nee, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>) A.n.a, (<hi rend='italic'>Arabic.</hi>)</cell><cell>Innai.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Ini.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Innai.</cell></row>
<row><cell>N-nin.</cell></row>
<row><cell><q>I,</q> or <q>Me.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>Nin.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Ni.<note place='foot'>Ni, <q>I,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Basque.</hi>)</note></cell>
  <cell>Nee, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>N'.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell><q>We.</q></cell><cell><q>We.</q></cell><cell><q>We.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>A.n.ou, A.n.c'h.n.ou.</cell><cell>Ni.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Nin-ou.</cell><cell>N.c'h.n.ou, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell><cell>Nyni.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Nin-owin.</cell><cell>N.h.h.n, (<hi rend='italic'>Arabic.</hi>)</cell><cell>Nyninnou.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
K', <q>Thou</q> and <q>Ye.</q><note place='foot'>This Pronoun does not occur in any Indo-European language except the
Welsh. The Pronoun of the first person occurs in a modified form in the Greek.</note>
</p>

<p>
This is also an abbreviation, the Pronoun in full is Ki,
K-in, K-il, <q>Thou;</q> Kin-owa, and Kil-ou, <q>Ye.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2cm} p{2cm} p{2cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Algonquyn.</cell><cell>Semetic.</cell><cell>Welsh.</cell></row>
<row><cell><q>Thou, Thine.</q></cell><cell><q>Thee, Thy.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>K'.</cell><cell>C'. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>Kee.</cell><cell>C'.ee. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell><q>Ye, Yours.</q></cell><cell></cell><cell><q>Ye.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>K'.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Ki.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Chwi.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Ki-nowa.</cell><cell>C-oun. C-n. (<hi rend='italic'>Chald.</hi>)
C-m.  (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>Kil-ou.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>

<p>
Du Ponceau notices another grammatical feature in which
it is clear, though he was unconscious of that fact, that these
North American Indian dialects form a connecting link between
the Semetic and Indo-European languages. <q>We
find,</q> he observes, <q>many Nouns substantive with M prefixed
in such a way as to form an integral part of the
words.</q>
</p>

<p>
This is a Semetic mode of forming a Noun from a Root!
In Latin, Nouns are formed from Roots by the same Letter
placed at the end of words, as in Regn-um, a mode of which
we have also had an example in the Algonquyn dialects, in the
words M'-huk, Mok-um!
</p>

<p>
Where long intervals of time have elapsed, it is in all cases
difficult to discriminate between the proofs of a general and
remote, and those of a near and specific relation. Still I
conceive the previous examples tend, in some measure, to
render it probable that there is a closer affinity between the
North American Indians and the inhabitants of Northern
Asia and of Europe, especially the Russians, Hungarians,
and other nations located in its Northern and Western
Regions, than exists between these American Septs and the
inhabitants of Southern Asia. Should this proposition be
confirmed by further investigation, it will be found to be in
unison with Adelung's conclusion, that the route by which
the first Colonists of Europe came from Central Asia lay
through the Steppes which separate the Chinese and Russian
Empires. The Nomade Hordes of these vast plains,&mdash;the
great <q>Officina Gentium,</q>&mdash;were probably the parent Septs
of all or most of the European nations on the one hand, and
of the populations of the North-east of Asia and of the opposite
American coasts on the other!
</p>

<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>

<p>
Of the general proposition, that the American Tribes and
the Nations of the Old World are descended from the same
Parent Stock, I conceive the evidence adduced in the previous
pages will be deemed to be conclusive.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='ApA001'/><anchor id='PgApA001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_A'/>
<head>Appendix A. Analytical Comparison Of Some Of The Most Important Words In The African Languages
With The Analogous Words In The Languages Of Asia, Europe, And America.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>This Comparison will serve to show:</hi>
</p>

<p>
1. The connexion between the Languages of the Negro population
of the Middle of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Africa</hi> with those of the races in the
North and South of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Africa</hi> who differ from the Negroes in
Physiognomy, Colour, and other Physical qualities.
</p>

<p>
2. The connexion between the Languages of every part of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Africa</hi>
with those of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Asia</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Europe</hi>, and <hi rend='smallcaps'>America</hi>.
</p>

<p>
3. The fundamental identity of the Languages of the four great
divisions of the Globe.
</p>

<pb n='ApA002'/><anchor id='PgApA002'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Oue ini and
Ou oini, Luminary Effulgence. [Probably connected with
<q>Ooh</q> Glory, <q>Eoohu</q> Day.] (<hi rend='italic'>Egyptian.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. R. Ou oein, to diffuse Light, [Illuminare.] (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell>
   <cell>Roongeh, <q>Sun.</q><note place='foot'>The names for the Sun, Moon, and the Eye, are generally from the same roots.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell></cell><cell>I mine, <q>Day.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Ra, Re, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Hor, <q>Horus,</q> the God of Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell>
   <cell>Huer, Day.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell>Horambe, Moon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA003'/><anchor id='PgApA003'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. O . een . n, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)
Wang, <q>Light emitted from a body.</q>(<hi rend='italic'>Chinese.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Wawn or Gwawn, <q>A quick darting of rays, (Dr. Owen Pughe's
Dict.) The Dawn.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Ee . ou . m <q>Day,</q>(<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>) [Probably from <q>Eoohu</q> Day, (<hi rend='italic'>Egyptian,</hi>) and
the suffix <q>M,</q> which in Hebrew forms nouns from roots, like the
English suffix <q>er</q> in Mak-er.<note place='foot'>Compare the unsatisfactory Etymology of Ee . ou . m, usually adopted by Hebrew
lexicographers, from E . m, Tumult, because there is <q>a tumultuous agitation of the
celestial fluid,</q> at daybreak.</note>]</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>Emee . n <q>Day.</q>(<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Arou, Behold! (<hi rend='italic'>Chald.</hi>)
R.a.e, to see. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Ora-o, to see. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Re, Moon, Re alt, Star. (<hi rend='italic'>Irish.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Ur, Fire, (<hi rend='italic'>Kurd.</hi>) Hur, Fire, and Or, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Armenian.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Ur-o. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Uru, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Aymarans, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Huere, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Zend.</hi>)</cell><cell></cell>
  <cell>Huarassi, Sun and Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Omaguans, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell> Hora, Time, (<hi rend='italic'>Greek,</hi>) an Hour, (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. A . ou . r, Light, Daylight. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb. &amp; Chaldæ.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Aurora, the Dawn. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Arpi, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Armenian.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA004'/><anchor id='PgApA004'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Wurabe, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Nubia.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell>Kammer, Ungmar, Moon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Re, the Sun, as above.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Iri, <q>Eye.</q><note place='foot'>This is an important word, as being one of the instances adduced by Dr. Leipsius, in
opposition to Champollion's opinion, that the modern Coptic is perfectly identical with the
ancient Egyptian. This word, Iri, <q>an Eye,</q> and its signification, are only known to us
through Plutarch. The term is obsolete in the Coptic.&mdash;Leipsius, <q>Lettre à Rossellini.</q></note> The symbol of Osiris, the God of Day.</cell>
  <cell>Iirri, <q>Sun</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Iris, the Dawn. (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Wurrhy, <q>Moon.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Abyss.</hi>) [Compare Wurabe, <q>Day,</q> above.] (<hi rend='italic'>Nubian.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Uhaaire, and Ver, <q>Moon.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>11.</cell><cell>La, <q>Fire.</q></cell><cell>Leaw, <q>Fire.</q></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA005'/><anchor id='PgApA005'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Or, Day.  (<hi rend='italic'>Armenian.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Wawr, or Gwawr, the Dawn.  (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>) Awringo, Sun (<hi rend='italic'>Finnish.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Ourhenha, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Hurons, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. A.ou.r, Light, &amp;c., as above; Also with m prefix&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. M . A . ou. r, An instrument or source of Light, applied to the Sun and Moon.  (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Mihira, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Mar, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Abassian.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. N. Mar, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Affghan.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Iru, Sun.  (<hi rend='italic'>Korea.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Eiere, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Zend.</hi>) [Compare Yere, Moon, (<hi rend='italic'>Samoied</hi>) below.]</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell>Iris, the Rainbow. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Wurra, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Sumbava.</hi>)</cell><cell>Wiri, Yere, and Irri, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Samoied.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>11.</cell><cell>Lohe, Flame. Lo-dern, <q>To Burn.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>)</cell><cell>Hello, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Runsienes, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA006'/><anchor id='PgApA006'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell>Lo, <q>Day.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Lp.s.h, <q>Flame.</q></cell><cell></cell><cell>Lelaffu, <q>Fire.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Lopsh, <q>To Burn.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell><cell></cell><cell>Leetshaatsi, <q>Sun.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Lataa, <q>Sun.</q> See Lo, La, above.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell>La, <q>Fire.</q> Lo, <q>Day,</q> as above.</cell>
   <cell>Leaw, Fire, as above. Also Lilo,  Fire.<note place='foot'>Mu lilo, Um lilo, also occur as words for fire, in the South of Africa.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>Lelegh, Day.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell>Eluk wee, Heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell>See Lelegh, <q>Day,</q> as above.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA007'/><anchor id='PgApA007'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell>Lo, and La, <q>Day.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Irish.</hi>)</cell>
   <cell>Olo, Sun and Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Vilellans, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Hallo Allo, a Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Corea.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. L.e.b.e, <q>Flame.</q> L.e.b, <q>To burn.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>) L.e.t, <q>Flame,</q> <q>To flame, burn.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Licht. (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>) Light. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>) Lo-dern, <q>To burn.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>) [See Lohe, above.]</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Hallo Alo, a Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Coriac.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Olo, Sun and Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Vilellans, S. A.</hi>)
Ele le dun, Flame. (<hi rend='italic'>Arowacks.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Uolok, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Esquim.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell>El eek, (<hi rend='italic'>Nootka Sound</hi>,) and Hello, Fire, (<hi rend='italic'>Runsienes, N. A</hi>.)
Ali-gega, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>M. Baya</hi>, extreme south of S. A.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell>Lux, Light. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)
Licht. (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>) Lluched, Lightning. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA008'/><anchor id='PgApA008'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Liklo, Ames-ligo, <q>An Eye.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Eli-ang, the Sun.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Eli-ang, the Sun, as above.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Lelangu, Sun.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Lainch, and Lainghitsi, Heaven.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA009'/><anchor id='PgApA009'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Lochatai, <q>He sees.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Llygad, <q>An Eye.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell>Look-eth. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. E.l. To shine. E.l.l. To shine brightly.</cell>
  <cell>Eel-ios, the Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. E.ee.l.l.  Lucifer. (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Hailih, and Hailihs, the Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Hāil, the Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>) Hell, Bright. (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Gra-<hi rend='italic'>haulai</hi>, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Abipones.</hi>) Hello, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Runsienes, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Hallo, Alo, a Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Coriac.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Olo, Sun.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Ali, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Moluccan.</hi>)</cell><cell></cell>
  <cell>Allit, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Vilellans, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell>Eel-ios, the Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Alank, a heavenly Luminary, or Star. (<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn dialects, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Alak, a Star. (<hi rend='italic'>Assanskians.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>11. Alagon, a Star. (<hi rend='italic'>Kotowskians, N. Asia.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>12. Lun, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Sirjanian &amp; Permian.</hi></cell>
  <cell>Lunus. Luna. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>) Luan, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Irish.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>13. Languin, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Moluccan.</hi>) [Also, in the same language, Ali, Day. Compare El-iang, above.]</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA010'/><anchor id='PgApA010'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell>Kalla, Coll, Moon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. N jellauma<note place='foot'>N'jellauma, and Liulu, both occur in the dialect of the Phellatas, and Leoure occurs
in that of the Fulahs, who are a kindred race.</note>, Day. <hi rend='italic'>Phellata dialect.</hi></cell><cell></cell>
  <cell>Woelau. Volan, Moon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Leoure, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Fulah dialect.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Liulu, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Phellata.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Hyalla, Heaven.</cell><cell>Ellu, Iulo, I ewel, Heaven.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA011'/><anchor id='PgApA011'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Gailgen, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Coriac.</hi>)
Glauh, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Gealach, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Irish.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Igaluk, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Kadjaks</hi>, extreme <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.w.</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>N.A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Killa, Quilla, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Quichuans, S.A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Jwala, Light, Flame. (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Gwawl, or Wawl, Light. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Lloer, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>) Laor, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Armorican.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Glauh-r, Moon. [Formed from Glauh, Moon, above, by <q>Sandhi.</q>] (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell>Liu, Colour. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
Llei-ad, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
[The double <hi rend='italic'>Ll</hi> gives to
the word a sound nearly
the same as <hi rend='italic'>Ch</hi>leiad.]</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Klaida, Klaidu, Moon, (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)
[This, and several of the previous Sanscrit words, have been compared
with the Welsh by Dr. Prichard.]</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Koilak, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Tchugassians</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.e.</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Asia</hi>, and <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.w.</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>America</hi>.)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Killak. (<hi rend='italic'>Greenland.</hi>) Killock, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Kadjaks.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Igalack Moon, as above. (<hi rend='italic'>Kadjaks.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA012'/><anchor id='PgApA012'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Serapis, or Soropis, the God of the Sun, the same as Osiris. (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Sorohb, Sun.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Scharappa,<note place='foot'>Burhum-<hi rend='italic'>Safara</hi>, The Sun, which occurs in one of the Negro dialects, seems to be
derivable from the same root.</note> <q>Moon.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Berber &amp; Dongolan.</hi>)</cell><cell>Sorrie, Sun.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Osiri, Osira, (Osiris), believed to be the God of the Sun (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Surrie, Sore, Sun.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Soroka,<note place='foot'>Mot-Sichari, Day, a word that occurs among the languages of the South of Africa, is
probably from the same root.</note> Day.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Assara, Moon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell>Osran, Osseram, Osseramme, Moon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>A-un, Sun. [See this word more fully illustrated in another
part of this Analysis.]</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Antu, a Day.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Andru, Day.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell><cell>Omma Ongma, <q>Moon.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>11.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA013'/><anchor id='PgApA013'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Sh . r ph, to burn, a Conflagration. S . h . r ph . e . m, <q>Seraphs.</q> Sh.r.b, to burn, scorch. Ze.r, to shine brightly.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Ts. e. r, a Light, Noon. (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Sêr, Stars.  (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Surya, the Indian God of the Sun. His orb personified. (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Scorch. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Sārā, <q>Moon.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Syrian</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mongol</hi>, &amp; <hi rend='italic'>Calmuck</hi>.)</cell>
  <cell>Sêr, Stars. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>, as above.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Ano, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Caraibs, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Antu Antú, Sun, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Araucan, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. <q>Indra,</q> the Indian God of Day, Diespater. (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Inti, Indi, Sun. (In several other dialects of <hi rend='italic'>S.A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell><cell>Omma, <q>Eye,</q> <q>Face,</q> also applied to <q>Sun
and Moon.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>) [Schneider.]</cell></row>
<row><cell>11. Mah, the Moon. <hi rend='italic'>Bucharian.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA014'/><anchor id='PgApA014'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Mo Moe.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Muhta.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Mum Muhm, <q>Eye.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Moomo, <q>Moon.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Manga, Eye.<note place='foot'>It may be inferred, however, that the simple word, Masso, was applied originally as we
find it in the Georgian, to the Sun, before it was used for the Eye. It is an error to suppose
that the names for such organs as the <q>Eye</q> belong to the first elements of language.
The name for the Eye is generally a mere derivative of words for <q>Light,</q> <q>Sun,</q> &amp;c.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell>Mone, <q>Moon.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Missigh, <q>Eye.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>11.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Massou, Massoo, Masso,
Massorohi, <q>Eye.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>12.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Masso-androu, Sun, (i.e.
<q>Eye of Day.</q>) [See Androu, Day, immediately before.]</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA015'/><anchor id='PgApA015'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Mi-en, <q>Face.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese &amp; Burman.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Ee m ee . n, <q>the Eye,</q> or Finger, (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)
[Similiter <q>Per-ception,</q> now used for the <q>Eye,</q> but applied originally
to the hand.]</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. M . n . ee. A name under which the idolatrous Jews worshipped
the <q>Material Heavens.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Mondy, <q>Sun.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Permian.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Manoak, <q>Sun,</q> or <q>Moon.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn Dialects.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell><q>Moon.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)
Mēnē, <q>Month.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)
Mensis, <q>Month.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Lat.</hi>)
Mana, <q>Moon.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Lapld.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Miezzi, <q>Eye.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Burman.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>11.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Musseete, <q>Day.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>New England.</hi>)
Metzli, <q>Moon.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mexican.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA016'/><anchor id='PgApA016'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Massch-ekka,  <q>Sun.</q> [Apparently from Missigh,<note place='foot'>See Note in page <ref target='PgApA014'>14.</ref></note> <q>Eye,</q> and
Ika, or Ik, <q>Fire.</q> Compare Massoandrou, <q>Sun.</q> <hi rend='italic'>South Africa.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Berbers &amp; Dongolans.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Masso-anru, <q>Sun.</q> Massu, Mass-ge, <q>Fire.</q></cell>
  <cell>Masso-anro, Masso-anru, <q>Sun.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Masso-am, Sun.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>Midding, <q>Moon.</q></cell><cell>Majava, <q>Day.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Wussuk, Fire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Wis, Sun.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>Att-aschi, Sun.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Sou Siou, Star. (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell><cell>Zu, Sun.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA017'/><anchor id='PgApA017'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Miaschta, <q>Moon.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Affghan.</hi>)
Māsi, <q>Moon.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Mesaz, <q>Moon.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Sclavonian.</hi>)
Mis, <q>Month.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. M.s.e<note place='foot'>See Note in page <ref target='PgApA014'>14</ref>.</note>, and M.j, <q>Sun.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Georgian.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Us-tus, burnt. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Usi Ussi, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>California, N. A.</hi>)
Is-chey, Fire.  (<hi rend='italic'>Black Feet Indians, N. A.</hi>)
Neetak <hi rend='italic'>Hasseh</hi>, Sun.
<hi rend='italic'>Hasche</hi>, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Chikkasahs</hi>, N. A.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Is-chey, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Black
Feet, N.A.</hi>, as above.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Ash, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)
Az-er, and At-emsch. (<hi rend='italic'>Persian.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Ass-o, to roast. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)
Azgo.<note place='foot'>These words,&mdash;Aithein, <q>To burn,</q> Greek, and <q>Ashes,</q> English, &amp;c.&mdash;are said by
German scholars to be mutually connected. (Schwenk's Wörterbuch.)</note> (<hi rend='italic'>Gothic.</hi>)
Ash-es. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Assista, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Hurons, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>Aith-ein, to burn. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. At-emsch. (<hi rend='italic'>Pehli.</hi>)
Ath-eresch, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Zend.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Sah, the Sun and Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Chippeway.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Soo, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Penobscot, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Suâ, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Muyscans,
S.A.</hi>, near the Isthmus of Darien.)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA018'/><anchor id='PgApA018'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell>So, Heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Shah, Flame.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Shah shah, Heat. (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Njite, <q>Fire.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Phellata.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Nissiek, <q>Fire.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>11.</cell><cell>Ntzai, <q>Sun.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>12.</cell><cell>Gimoihu, Fire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13. Khem, God of the Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>14.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15.</cell><cell></cell><cell>T'kaam.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Gam, Moon.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA019'/><anchor id='PgApA019'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell>Sua, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Basque.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Zee ou, Beams, Rays, Splendour.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Zee, to be bright. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Zĕō, to be hot. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Sua, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>, as above.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Sch un, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Mantchu.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Tscan-u, Sun. Tschaan, Day.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Z.k. Flame.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Tschan-e, Moon, (<hi rend='italic'>Kinai Tribe</hi>, extreme <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.w.</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>N. A.</hi>)
Tcenoe, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Cherokee.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Ts.c'h.e, to shine.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Sacche, Sun.
(<hi rend='italic'>Mossans, S.A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Ts.c'h, clear and parching.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Sekkinek, Sun.
(<hi rend='italic'>Greenland, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Ts.c'h.ts c'h, violent Heat, or Drought. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Siccus, Dry. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)
Sych, Dry. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. N.sh.k, to kindle, to rise in flame, to kindle a fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>11.</cell><cell>Nitidus, Shining. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>12. C'h m, Hot, Heat.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13. C'h.m m, to be inflamed.</cell></row>
<row><cell>14. C'h.m.n.ee.n, Sun Images. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Kaumet, Sun.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Kaumei, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Greenland.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>16.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Gomma, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>California.</hi>)
Kyem, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Araucan.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA020'/><anchor id='PgApA020'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell>Giom, Heaven</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Chrom.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Grom.</cell><cell>Giro, Sun</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Krom, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell><cell>Karree, Moon. Korro, Moon.</cell><cell>T'kaukarah, Moon. Kohri, <q>Moon.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Grom, <q>Fire,</q>  (<hi rend='italic'>Egyptian</hi>, as above.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Giro, <q>Sun,</q> as above.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA021'/><anchor id='PgApA021'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Kümar, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Permian.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. C'hr.a, Ch.r.e, to kindle,  burn up. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Chor. (<hi rend='italic'>Persian.</hi>) Coaracy, Cuarasi, Chorschid. (<hi rend='italic'>Pehli.</hi>)</cell><cell>Quarassi, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Brazil.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Chorschid, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Ossetian.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Chiriti, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Caraibs.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. G.r.m, Warm. (<hi rend='italic'>Pers.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Gorm, to heat, or warm. (<hi rend='italic'>Irish.</hi>)
<q>Warm.</q>  (<hi rend='italic'>Eng. &amp; Germ.</hi>)
Gwr-ês, Heat;</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. C'h.r.e, to burn. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi> as above.)</cell>
  <cell>Greiaw, to burn; Grei-an, i.e. <q>the Burner,</q> the Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Grau-haulai, Sun. Grau-ek, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Abipones, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>Grian. (<hi rend='italic'>Irish.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Grag, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Armenian.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Gar-akou.  (<hi rend='italic'>Hurons.</hi>) Garocqua, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Iroquois, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Ee.ph.c'h,<note place='foot'>It is observable that the Hebrew words, Ee.ph.c'h, and Ph.ou.c'h, are evidently
imitations of the act of Breathing, or Puffing. They may, I conceive, be regarded as the
roots of all the words for <q>Fire,</q> &amp;c., which follow.</note> to breathe, to pant.</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Epee, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Katabans, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Ph.ou.c'h, to blow upon, kindle, inflame. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Pioc Peez, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Moxians, S. A.</hi>)
Paahteh, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Nadowessians, N. A.</hi>)
Futui, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Betoans, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA022'/><anchor id='PgApA022'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell>Bazu.</cell><cell>Ibida.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell>Bazou, Fire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell><cell>Fosseye, the Sun.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13.</cell></row>
<row><cell>14.</cell><cell>Aifi-am, Of-endi, the Moon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15.</cell><cell></cell><cell>T'aib, Fire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16.</cell></row>
<row><cell>17. Teb re, Heaven.</cell><cell>Tubhia, Tubia, Fire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>18. Tuah hey, <q>the Sun.</q></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA023'/><anchor id='PgApA023'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell>Phōs, Fire, Flame.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Ee.ph.c'h. (As above.)</cell>
  <cell>Ee.ph-aistos, Vulcan, the God of Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 Ph.ou.c'h. (As above.)</cell><cell>Foc-us. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Aifi, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Sumbava.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Fire, Fei-er, (<hi rend='italic'>English &amp; German</hi>,) formed from
the root by adding -<hi rend='italic'>er</hi>, the formative of nouns.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Fi. (<hi rend='italic'>Japan.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Fei. (<hi rend='italic'>Siam.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Vu-r. (<hi rend='italic'>Affghan.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Bi. (<hi rend='italic'>Siberian.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. B.sh.l, to ripen in the Sun, to boil.  (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Bask. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Phos, Star. (<hi rend='italic'>Japan.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Phō-s, Fire, Light. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>11. Ee p h o, to shine forth. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Pha-o, to shine. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>12. Ee p.h.o, Brightness, Splendour. (<hi rend='italic'>Chald.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Phoi b-os, <q>Phœbus,</q> the Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>13. Ee p.ph.e, very beautiful. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>14. Alf, the Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Kurdish.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>15. Af, the Sun, and T'eb, the Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscr.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>16. Af-teb, the Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Persian.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>17. Tab, Heat. (<hi rend='italic'>Persian.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Tep-or. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Tash, a Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Pimans</hi>, south of <hi rend='italic'>N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>18. Taw, <q>Sun.</q>  (<hi rend='italic'>Kurdish.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Tea-s, or Deas, Sunbeams. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Tasi, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>The Kinai</hi>, extreme <hi rend='smallcaps'>n. w.</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>N. A.</hi>)
Daazoa, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Mokobis, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA024'/><anchor id='PgApA024'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell>Tedi, <q>Moon.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. To trig, <q>Moon.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Ot u, and</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Hauy, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Nubia &amp; Abyss.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Hu, Fire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Ei T.ei, and T'jih <q>Fire.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Tuah' hey, <q>Sun.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Nubia &amp; Abyss.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Haou.</cell><cell>Uwya, Awia.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Eoohu, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell><cell>Ua, and Ou, <q>Sun.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell><cell>Aou.eh, Moon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11. <q>I.oh</q> Lunus, the God of the Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>12. Joh Ooh Oih Oou, Glory. (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>13.</cell><cell>Hu.n, Sun. [See Hu, Fire, above.]</cell></row>
<row><cell>14.</cell><cell>Au-n, and Uwi-n, <q>Sun.</q>
[See Awia, and Ua, Sun, above.]</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA025'/><anchor id='PgApA025'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Tadi, <q>Hot.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Affghan.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Tata, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Omaguans</hi>, N. A.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Tab-dar, Hot. (<hi rend='italic'>Persian.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Tē k-ō, to melt, consume. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>To-atka, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Musgohges</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>S. Carolina, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>Tœda, a Torch. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Ot m, to be burnt up. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Hot. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Ouato, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Caribs, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Ho, <q>Fire.</q>  (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Otschichta, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Onandagos, N. A.</hi>)
Oua, (<hi rend='italic'>Natchez</hi>,) and You, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Woccons, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Ha, Hai, Hen, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Corea.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Hueiou, Weyo, Veio, <q>Sun.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Caraibs, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell>Ē-ōs, the Dawn. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Auhe, Oweeh, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Choctans, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Yehiha, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Mobimans, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>11.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Yachquau, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Senekas, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>12.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13. Hen, Sun (as above). (<hi rend='italic'>Corea.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Hu an, Phœbus, the Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>14.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA026'/><anchor id='PgApA026'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Tôn-ih, Fire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Tô in Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Nubia &amp; Abyssinia.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>Tan gu, Tan go, Tan goa, Sun.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Danghitsi, Heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Deemwa, Fire. Diambo, Sun.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Ik, Ika, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Berbers &amp; Dongolans.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Ejia, Fire.</cell><cell>Ecy, Fire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>Ag ning, Engink, Sun.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Nahangue, Nonge, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Fulahs &amp; Phellatahs.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Eanga, Inyanga, Inganga, Moon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. K o e, to burn.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. K o.h th, Fire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11. K o e, to burn. (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA027'/><anchor id='PgApA027'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell>Ta-an, Fire.   (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)
Teine, <q>Fire,</q> also <q>The Sun.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Irish.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Ta-ande, and Teinde. (<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn Dialects.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell></cell><cell>To-natiuh, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Mexican.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Tschingochok, Sun, and T angeik. (<hi rend='italic'>Tschugassians</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>n. e.</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Asia</hi> and
<hi rend='smallcaps'>n. w.</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>America</hi>.)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Tschingukuk, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Kadjaks</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>n. w.</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Ten gri, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Tagurian.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Toendi, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Hurons, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Tee me, or Tîme, (<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>,)
and Don y m, or Tou y m, Heat, Hot. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Ioak, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Choktahs, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Ag nih, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Iigain, <q>I Burn.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Russ.</hi>)
Ignis, Ignem.  (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)
Okon, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Sclavonian.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Ig nach, Ing nek, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Greenland.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Ee.c.b, And Cou e, to burn. (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Kaiō, to burn. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Co o h, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Sussees, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell><cell></cell><cell>K uthal, K tal, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Araucan, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>11.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Chuk kut. (<hi rend='italic'>Naragansetts.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA028'/><anchor id='PgApA028'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1. K o h th, Fire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Shah, Flame. Shah shah Heat. (<hi rend='italic'>Egyptian.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>Ejia, <q>Fire.</q></cell><cell>Ecy, Fire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Edja, <q>Fire.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Dio, <q>Fire.</q> Day, <q>Sun.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>Eju, Ejwyge, Sun.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell>Gajewoade, Fire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell>Uk, Igodu, Moon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell><cell></cell><cell>K a, and K cha, Moon.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA029'/><anchor id='PgApA029'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Kohteoue, Kotawa, (and used by the same tribe.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell></cell><cell>S cute, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Miamis, N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Djo, Djau, Heaven, Air. (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Die-s, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Divasi, Day.</cell><cell>Dio, Dios, (Jupiter, Father of Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>) |</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Diwaspiti (<q>Diespater</q>), Jupiter, <q>Father of Day.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Diespater. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>Equia, and Igus-guia, Sun. Goiza, Morning. (<hi rend='italic'>Basque.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Kizho, Kes-us, Kissessua, Gischi, Geschu, Sun; Kijigah, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn dialects:</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Hak,<note place='foot'>Du Ponceau, whose principles are here adopted as probably applicable to all languages,
states that in the Algonquyn Class of Dialects of North America the names for the Moon
are derived from those for the Sun, with the addition of a word meaning night, &amp;c. The
word Hak, he says, is very generally thus used, for the Moon, with the requisite addition.</note> Moon;
Io-hakta, a Star. (<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn</hi> dialects, N. A.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell><cell></cell><cell>K'akh, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Yucatan.</hi>)
Kacha, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Ugaljachnuti</hi>, near <hi rend='italic'>Behring's
Straits, N. A.</hi>) Cayacu, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Brazil.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA030'/><anchor id='PgApA030'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Onatejá, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Berber &amp; Dongolan.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>T' jo, Moon.</cell><cell>T' ga, Moon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell></cell><cell>T.jih, Fire.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Onatejá, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Berber &amp; Dongolan.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>T'jo, <q>Moon.</q></cell><cell>T' ga, Moon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell>Teelee, <q>Sun.</q> Duléh, <q>Sun.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>Dalkah, <q>Day.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell>Dilko, <q>Heaven.</q> Dalkah, a Day, (as above.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell>Genaa, <q>Sun.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell><cell>Guiante, <q>Sun.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>11.</cell><cell>Gonde, Gonda, <q>Moon.</q></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA031'/><anchor id='PgApA031'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Tacock, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Esquimaux.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Taiki, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Pimans, S.A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Tüiküt, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Coriac.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Taiki, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Tarahumaran.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. D'ge, <q>Day.</q>   (<hi rend='italic'>Georgian.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Tag, <q>Day,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>) Day. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Tagara, <q>Heaven.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Jakutian.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Tael, Tylys, Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Permian.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Taglich. (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>) Dai-ly. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Tjel, <q>Day.</q> Tsjel-emi, <q>Daily.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ostiaks.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Tsele, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Tarahumaran</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>s</hi>. of <hi rend='italic'>N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Talkon, a Day. (<hi rend='italic'>The Kinai</hi>, extreme <hi rend='smallcaps'>n. w.</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Guin esch, Gunes, <q>Sun.</q>  (<hi rend='italic'>Turk.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Gunnei, or Cunnei, <q>A great Fire.</q></cell>
  <cell>Coun, Fire. (<hi rend='italic'>Chippeway.</hi>) Kes-is Kesus, <q>Sun.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Gun, <q>Day.</q>  (<hi rend='italic'>Casanians.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Gunnes, <q>Warm.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>11. Kun, Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>Tartar.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA032'/><anchor id='PgApA032'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell>Agonne, Moon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA033'/><anchor id='PgApA033'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Kjun, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Turk.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Egun, Day. (<hi rend='italic'>Basque.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Kize-kun, Okené-gat,<note place='foot'>According to Du Ponceau the words for <q>Day,</q> in the Algonquyn tongues, are
modifications of the words for the <q>Sun.</q></note> <q>Day.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn dialects.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Tes-Gessu, Sun. [Evidently a compound of
Gischu or Kiz-ho, the Sun, with <q>Tesh.</q><note place='foot'>Tash,
<q>A Day,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Pimans</hi>, south of <hi rend='italic'>N.A.</hi>) This
word, Teas, or Tesh, has already been traced through the various meanings of Fire, Sun, Day, &amp;c.</note>]</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Tschi, Schi, <q>Day.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Morduins</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>N.E.</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Asia</hi>.)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Teshe-kow, <q>Day,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn Dialects.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA034'/><anchor id='PgApA034'/>

<p>
According to Du Ponceau the words for <q>Heaven</q> in the Algonquyn tongue are derived from several sources. A numerous class
consists of <q>Mots derivées de <hi rend='italic'>Kesuch</hi>, Astre, Soleil,</q> i.e. words from <hi rend='italic'>Kesuch</hi>, <q>Sun, Star.</q> Compare the names for the <q>Eye,</q>
previously noticed; also traced by Du Ponceau to Kesuch, or Kesus, <q>The Sun.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell></cell><cell>T' gachu, <q>Heaven.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Tschukko, <q>Heaven.</q> K' tak.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Nghoi, <q>Heaven.</q> [Also <q>Thunder in the Air.</q>]</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Homma, <q>Heaven.</q> [See
Omma, Moomo, and other analogous words previously explained,
applied to <q>Sun and Moon.</q>]</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA035'/><anchor id='PgApA035'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. K jok,<note place='foot'>Words for Heaven, in the languages of the North of Asia, which are evidently connected
with the North American Indian words for Heaven, and also with the North
American Indian names for the <q>Sun,</q> from which they are derived.</note> <q>Heaven.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Turk.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Kez-hik, Keg-ik, Heaven</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Chok, <q>Heaven.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Tart.</hi>)
Kuk, <q>Heaven.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Casan.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Kh'igan, <q>Heaven.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Comac.</hi>)
Ko'chan, <q>Heaven.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Kamschatka.</hi>)
Kundschu, <q>Heaven.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Jukadshires.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Gezhegon, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Shkai, <q>Heaven.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Morduins.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell><q>Sky.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eng &amp; Dan.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Ta k, Tack, <q>Heaven.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Esquimaux.</hi>)
Keschékewé, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Kiusiu-luste. (<hi rend='italic'>Tscheremessian.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA036'/><anchor id='PgApA036'/>

<p>
Another class of names for <q>heaven,</q> are words signifying <q><hi rend='italic'>On High</hi>,</q> <hi rend='italic'>En Haut.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Szemmèÿ, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Nubia &amp; Abyssinia.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Szèmma, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Berbers &amp; Dongolans.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Szemma, Heaven, (<hi rend='italic'>Phellata.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Szemma.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Szemma.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell>Assaman. Sambiam pungo. Assamane, Heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Apĕ, Apē, Aphe, <q>Head.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>9. A ph . o ph, a Giant. (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Ivaq.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell><cell>I banju</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA037'/><anchor id='PgApA037'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Sema, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Arabic.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Shmia, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Pehlwi.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Asman, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Siberian Tartars</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>A woso-gamé, Heaven. [Literally <q>En Haut,</q> on high.] (<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>Upo. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)
Up. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)
Heavion, to rise, Heafon, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Ang. Sax.</hi>)
Haupt. (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>)</cell><cell>Apez, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Moxian.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>8.</cell><cell>Heafod, (<hi rend='italic'>Ang. Sax.</hi>)
Huf-wud, Head. (<hi rend='italic'>Swedish.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>9.</cell><cell></cell><cell>I bag, I bâca. (<hi rend='italic'>Brazil.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>10.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Oubecou,  (<hi rend='italic'>Caraibs</hi>,)
Ipigem, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Abipones.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA038'/><anchor id='PgApA038'/>

<p>
Another Class of names for <q>Heaven,</q> are words signifying <q><hi rend='italic'>On High</hi>,</q> <hi rend='italic'>En Haut.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Pe, and Phe, Heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. N e th-Pe and Ne-Pheou, Heaven-s or Heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Net-phe, an Egyptian Goddess, the consort of Seb or Saturn. Her
emblem was <q><hi rend='italic'>The Firmament</hi>.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Ne-Pheou, Heaven-s or Heaven. [Like the Greek <q>Ouranoi.</q>] (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Sulu, <q>Heaven.</q> [Compare preceding words.]</cell>
  <cell>I suhlu, Heaven.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA039'/><anchor id='PgApA039'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Ibo, Ibunga, the Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>California.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>Nebo, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Sclavon.</hi>)
Nev, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. S l, to raise, elevate. (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Celsus, Cœlum. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA040'/><anchor id='PgApA040'/>

<p>
Another Class of words for the <q>Sky</q> is derived, as is obvious in many languages, from words primarily meaning <q>Air.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Maaro, Heaven. [Compare
the formation of M&mdash;.' A . ou . r, a Luminary, <hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>,
from A our, Light,<note place='foot'>According to the views of many Hebrew scholars, A . ou . r, <q>Light,</q> and A ou . ee . r,
<q>Air,</q> are probably from the same root&mdash;A r. <q>To flow,</q>&mdash;applied to Water, Air,
Light, &amp;c. (See p. 5, Appendix A.)</note> as previously explained.]</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>Iru, Heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Atem co.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Aineha.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Aineha addela, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Nubia &amp; Abyss.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA041'/><anchor id='PgApA041'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. A ou . ee . r, Air, Space, (<hi rend='italic'>Chald.</hi>) from
A r, to flow.  (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>A wyr, the Air, the Sky. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. A r w, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Ossetian.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>A ē r and Ē r ē, Juno, the Atmosphere or Heavens personified.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Auwa, Heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>Sib. Tartars.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>A .ō, to blow, breathe. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)
A ha, Breath.  (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>)
A-them, Breath, Air. (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Wahwi, <q>Heaven.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn.</hi>) [According to Du
Ponceau, of unknown origin, <q>origine inconnue.</q> But see
the adjoining column.]</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>At m-ē, At m-os, Breath, Vapour.
Atmos-Sphaira, Atmosphere. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)
Atmosphere. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)
Chwa, a gust of Wind. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Aino, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Mossans, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Oeen, Eye. Ene, Behold. (<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi>) Yen, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>En, Behold. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>En-ourou, Yen-ourou, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Caraibs, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA042'/><anchor id='PgApA042'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell>Ne ay. Hinma, Eye.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell>Neay (as above).</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>Nou kou, Onukou, Eye.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>K hasso, Eye.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell>Guitte, Eye.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Egō at, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Nubia &amp; Abyss.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA043'/><anchor id='PgApA043'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Ñahui, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Quichauns.</hi>)
Nàgui, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Quitenans, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Ne, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Circassian.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Ne, Nege, Ge, <q>Eye.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Araucan, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Nigüecogue, Nigecogee, <q>Eye.</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>M. Bayan.</hi>) Natocle, <q>Eye.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Abipones</hi>,
inhabitants of the extreme <hi rend='smallcaps'>s</hi>. of <hi rend='italic'>S.
America</hi>.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Achsi, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell></cell><cell>Ishyik. K hescoué, the Eye, connected with Kesus, the Sun.
(<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn,<note place='foot'>The names for the Eye, in the <hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn</hi> dialects of North America, are stated by
Du Ponceau to be derivatives of names for the Sun. This is generally but not, it would
seem, universally the case in all languages. Probably it would also be more correct, as a
general rule, to say that the names for the Eye, and for the Sun, are from the same roots,
than that the latter are the roots of the former.</note> N. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Kussee, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Nootka Sound.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Giosgus, Gus, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Turk.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>Eage, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Ang. Sax.</hi>)
Oko, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Sclavonian.</hi>)
Oculus, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA044'/><anchor id='PgApA044'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell>Zu, Sun (as before).</cell>
  <cell>T' saguh, Eye.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>Szan-ko, Eye.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA045'/><anchor id='PgApA045'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Sah, the Sun and Moon. (<hi rend='italic'>Chippeway</hi>, as before.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Zu, and Zuiakc, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Lulians</hi>, S. A.)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>Sagax, Quick of Sight. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>.)
Sight. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Sai, Saiwa, Saie, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Samoied.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>See. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>) Sehen. (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Schun, <q>Sun.</q>  (<hi rend='italic'>Mantchu.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Sun. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Sem, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Ostiaks.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Szem, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Hungarian.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Shenek, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Alyon. dialects</hi>, N. A.)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA046'/><anchor id='PgApA046'/>

<p>
In the words next following we have an example of the principle that the terms applied to the perceptive powers of the <q>Hand,</q> in the
first instance, form a source of many analogous words applied to the operations of the other senses, and to those of the mind.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egyptians, &amp;c.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Middle Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negroes.</hi></cell>
  <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots, &amp;c.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Tewho, Eye.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Batte, Eye.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Bal, an Eye, Bel, Eyes. (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Belle, Blind. [Supposed by Dr. Loewe to be from Bel or Bal, and
the Hebrew negative suffix <q><hi rend='italic'>l</hi>.</q>] (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>Rogue, Heaven.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA047'/><anchor id='PgApA047'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm} p{2.6cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.</cell><cell>Europe.</cell><cell>America.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1. E e d, the Hand.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Yede, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Zamucans, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. E ed o, to feel, to perceive, to know.</cell>
  <cell>Eido, to <hi rend='italic'>see</hi>, to know. (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Do-eth re, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Zend.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Do-eth, Wise. (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell></cell><cell>Toké, Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Villelans, S. A.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. B th, the Pupil of the Eye. (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi>)</cell>
  <cell>Ball, Eyeball.  (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)
Bli-ck. (<hi rend='italic'>German.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>6.</cell><cell>Blink. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)
[Compare this word with the last.]</cell></row>
<row><cell>7.</cell><cell>Blind, Black. (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>)</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA048'/><anchor id='PgApA048'/>

<p>
Remarks.
</p>

<p>
The proofs involved in the previous Analysis of the original unity of
the different languages of the globe are distinct and vivid. It will be observed
that those irregularities of structure, which are to be found more
or less in each individual language, viewed separately, disappear when the
whole mass of human tongues are thus surveyed in combination as derivative
branches of one original speech. Moreover, it will be seen that the
greater the number of languages, and the wider the geographical surface
of the globe comprised in the comparison, the more minutely may be
traced the steps of the transition by which the languages of mankind
branched off from their common Original. This evidence is in its nature
demonstrative of the truths developed in these pages.
</p>

<p>
It will be apparent that the Heavenly Bodies were originally designated
by numerous synonymes applied to the Sun, Moon, and Stars alike. In
the course of time, a portion of these terms fell into disuse among each
different branch of the human family; and as these various tribes did not,
except in individual instances, preserve the same terms, these changes
gave rise to differences, apparently fundamental. Moreover, in those instances
in which the <emph>same</emph> terms were retained, time produced important
conventional differences of <emph>application</emph>. For example, in order to distinguish
the Sun, Moon, &amp;c. from each other.
</p>

<p>
1. A portion of these synonymes, which were originally used for all
the Heavenly Bodies alike, were exclusively <emph>appropriated</emph> to the Sun, while
other synonymes were appropriated in like manner to the Moon, &amp;c.;
among different nations the same terms were frequently applied to <emph>different</emph>
luminaries. Thus, in conformity to this principle, the English words
<q>Sun</q> and <q>Moon</q> will be found to occur in the previous Analysis each
applied, in other languages, to <emph>both</emph> those luminaries.
</p>

<p>
2. In some cases the different luminaries were distinguished from each
other in a different manner, viz. two or more synonymes were united into
one compound word, which was employed as the distinctive name of one
of the Heavenly Bodies, as of the Sun, for example, while the <q>Moon</q> and
the <q>Stars</q> continued to be known by their original names, consisting of
simple synonymes; or received new names, formed by means of <emph>distinct</emph>
compounds.
</p>

<pb n='ApA049'/><anchor id='PgApA049'/>

<p>
Examples of the second class abound in the dialects of the American
continent. One example may suffice in this place, by way of illustration:
<q>Tes-gessu</q> in some of these dialects means the Sun; in other dialects
we find each of its component elements, <q><hi rend='italic'>Tês</hi></q> and <q><hi rend='italic'>Gessu</hi>,</q> used <emph>separately</emph>
as names of the same luminary. In common with many other
important truths, the nature and origin of these compounds are, I conceive,
rendered clearly apparent by an extended range of comparison,
though they seem to have been a source of embarrassment to the philosophical
mind of Du Ponceau, whose valuable inquiries were confined to a
particular class of the dialects of North America.
</p>

<p>
When the results of the previous Analysis are compared with the
previous collection of African synonymes, used as names of the Heavenly
Bodies, &amp;c., it will be found that <emph>nearly every one</emph> of these synonymes has
been unequivocally connected with the languages of the other three great
divisions of the globe. The exceptions are too insignificant to be in any
respect deserving of attention, with reference to the objects of this investigation.
The completeness of this explanation of the African terms may,
in the first instance, form a subject of surprise. But, astonishing as the
results of the previous comparison in this respect undoubtedly are, they
are nevertheless precisely the same as we should be led <hi rend='italic'>à priori</hi> to expect,
on the assumption that the African nations are descended from the same
stock as the inhabitants of the other three continents.<note place='foot'>I need scarcely observe that the previous Analysis must necessarily be, in some
respects, philologically incomplete. Agrêska, Ogrêska, (<hi rend='italic'>Nubia</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Abyssinia</hi>,) seem
to be related to Agir, Fire, (<hi rend='italic'>Kurd</hi>.) We-taga, the Sun, (<hi rend='italic'>Negro</hi>,) seems to be a compound
of the second class above noticed from Awia, Uwia, and Tjo, T'ga, African words
for the Heavenly Bodies. Gjaubenje and Ma-undgage wodu, Fire, are plainly compounds
from Gajewodu, Fire, (<hi rend='italic'>Negro</hi>.) The evidence derived from words, of which the origin
is clearly traceable, is so complete, that all words of doubtful origin have been omitted
from the previous and from the following Tables.</note>
</p>

<pb n='ApA050'/><anchor id='PgApA050'/>

<p>
Words For <q>Man, Woman, Human Being.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
[In the following Analysis, the letter <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> marks nouns masculine, (<q>Vir,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>, <q>Man,</q> <hi rend='italic'>English</hi>;) <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> marks nouns feminine, (<q>Fœmina,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>, <q>Woman,</q> <hi rend='italic'>English</hi>;) <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> marks terms applied to a <q>Human
Being,</q> whether <q>male</q> or <q>female,</q> (<q>Homo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>, <q>Mensch,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>;) there is no equivalent expression in the English
language.]
</quote>

<p>
From the following Analysis, it will be apparent that, originally, the
same words were in most instances applied to individuals of the human
race, whether male or female, indiscriminately. Subsequently, a portion
of the synonymes, thus indiscriminately applied in the first instance to the
<emph>whole</emph> species, were <emph>separately</emph> appropriated to each of the two sexes;
while another portion, as, for example, the Latin, <q>Homo,</q> and the
German, <q>Mensch,</q> continued to be used as general terms for an individual
of the species, <emph>without reference to sex</emph>.
</p>

<p>
As the appropriation of these words was purely conventional, the same
synonymes were very frequently appropriated, among different branches
of the human race, to different sexes: i.e. a word appropriated to <q>Man</q>
(Vir) by some tribes was appropriated to the <q>Female</q> sex (Fœmina) by
other tribes. It is also evident that the terms thus appropriated consisted
in some instances of simple, in others of compound, synonymes.
</p>

<p>
These principles, which are precisely analogous to the results which
flow from a comparison of the names of <q>The Heavenly Bodies</q> in the
African tongues and in the other languages of the globe, will be found to
afford a complete and consistent explanation of the phenomena displayed
by the following Analysis, viz.: As before suggested, we find the <emph>words</emph>
applied to the <emph>human race</emph> in the different tongues of the globe <emph>the same</emph>;
it is only in the <emph>appropriation of those words</emph>, as regards the two <emph>sexes</emph>,
that we find a wide diversity in the various languages of the human race.
</p>

<pb n='ApA051'/><anchor id='PgApA051'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class I.</hi>
</p>

<p>
First Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Fulahs &amp; Phellatahs</hi></cell>
  <cell>Gour-ko, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Gourk-o Mahodo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell>
  <cell>Gourr, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Garr, H., Core, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>
Gour-gne, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Kerim, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi></cell>
  <cell>Gour, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (A mighty man, a hero.) Gour-on, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Taraikai</hi></cell><cell>Guru, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Kamschatka</hi></cell><cell>K ur, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Pelu</hi></cell><cell>K or, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi> (as above)</cell><cell>Core. <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Second Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Madagascar</hi></cell><cell>Urun, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>
Orrang, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi><note place='foot'>Hence the name of the <q>Ourang Outang.</q></note></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>. (Modifications of <q>Gour and Gour-on,</q> above.)</cell>
  <cell>Our, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Ouron, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Malay</hi></cell><cell>Orang, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Quicuans</hi></cell><cell>Uar mi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi> (as above)</cell><cell>Ker im, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
There is a very obvious connexion between the above words for Man
and a word for <q>The Hand,</q> of which the extreme antiquity is apparent
from its occurring in the languages of races so widely separated as the
following, in whose tongues this word exists in the subjoined forms, which
cannot be said essentially to differ from each other: Gara (<hi rend='italic'>Mongol</hi>),
Kara (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>), Keir (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), <q>The Hand.</q> [Compare the relation
shown in the following examples between Manus, <q>The Hand</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>), and
Manus-zia (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>), and Men-sch (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>), i.e. Homo, a <q>Human
Being.</q>]
</p>

<pb n='ApA052'/><anchor id='PgApA052'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class II.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>English</hi></cell>
  <cell>To <hi rend='italic'>Be</hi>.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi> (Living, to live)</cell><cell>Biou.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi> (To live)</cell><cell>Bio-ō.<note place='foot'>Obaini, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Baning, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Negro</hi>), seem to be connected with Bio-ōn (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), <q>A
Being,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>.)</note></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi> (Life)</cell><cell>Bi-os.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Koibals, N. Asia</hi></cell><cell>Biusé, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Buas-ja, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class III.</hi>
</p>

<p>
First Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi></cell><cell>Homo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Koosas</hi></cell><cell>Uhm-to, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> Uhm-fasi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>(A Child)</cell><cell>Uhm-toano.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land.</hi> (A compound, apparently, of Ommo and the
previous word <q>Biou,</q> &amp;c.)</cell><cell>Bi-ommo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Betoans</hi></cell><cell>Humasoi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> Umasoi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Um-ir, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> Mo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ossetians</hi></cell><cell>Mo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Guaramians</hi></cell><cell>Me, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Amme, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Emme, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>
Meame, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>
Mammoku, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>
Mangman, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA053'/><anchor id='PgApA053'/>

<p>
The following are examples of words of this class applied to the Female
Sex:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Mobimans</hi></cell><cell>Ma, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Mossans</hi>  (<q>A Mother</q>)</cell><cell>Meme, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Ma, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>,  Mmi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi></cell><cell>Hime, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Himi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi></cell><cell>Emea, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Karassians and Ostiaks</hi></cell><cell>Ima, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>,  Ime, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Fin.</hi></cell><cell>Waimo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Second Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi> (from Homo)</cell><cell>Ho-<hi rend='italic'>min</hi>-em, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>(Human)</cell><cell>Hu-<q><hi rend='italic'>man</hi></q>-ûs.</cell></row>
<row><cell>(The Hand)</cell><cell><q><hi rend='italic'>man</hi></q>-us.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Sans.</hi> (A <q>Human Being</q>)</cell><cell>Manus-zia, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>German</hi> (The same)</cell><cell>Men-sch, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>(A Man, Vir)</cell><cell>Mann, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>English</hi></cell><cell>Man, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Danish</hi></cell><cell>Mand, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Manee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Mond, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Mundu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Lagoa Bay</hi></cell><cell>Monhee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Beetjuanas</hi></cell><cell>Muhn-to, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Mon-una, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Kurd</hi></cell><cell>Manno, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Ossetian</hi></cell><cell>Moine Mo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Omaguans</hi></cell><cell>Mena, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
The following are examples in which the <hi rend='italic'>Second Modification</hi> and the
transition from the first to the second form of these words are traceable
in words applied to the Female Sex.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Fin.</hi> (Woman, as above)</cell><cell>Waimo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi></cell><cell>Wa-<hi rend='italic'>man</hi>i, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>English</hi></cell><cell>Wo-man, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA054'/><anchor id='PgApA054'/>

<p>
The words of this Class may be distinctly traced, in both their previous
modifications, as Pronouns in common use in the principal languages of
Europe and Asia. The value of this evidence will be understood when
Horne Tooke's principle, that Pronouns are identical with Nouns, is borne
in mind.
</p>

<p>
1. Pronouns identical with Amme, Emme, Meame, <q>Man,</q> above:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Aham, <q>I,</q> Mam, <q>Me,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit.</hi>)</l>
<l>Eme, <q>Me,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek.</hi>)</l>
</lg>

<p>
2. Pronouns identical with Monhe, Mano, Manee, <q>Man,</q> above.
</p>

<lg>
<l>Mon, <q>I,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ostiak.</hi>) Men, I, (<hi rend='italic'>Persian.</hi>)</l>
<l>Menik, <q>I,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Belutchee.</hi>) Menya, <q>Me,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Russian.</hi>)</l>
<l><q>Mein,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>German and English.</hi>)</l>
</lg>

<p>
For other examples, see Observations on the Algonquyn Dialects of
North America.
</p>

<p>
There is another topic that calls for observation in this place.
</p>

<p>
The origin of the peculiar transition, observable in this class of words,
as, for example, in the instance of the Latin words <q>Homo, Ho-<hi rend='italic'>minis</hi>,
Hu-manus, Manus,</q> has been fully investigated in the Observations on the
Algonquyn Dialects of North America. Those observations are equally
applicable in this place, for the previous Analysis establishes the remarkable
fact that the African languages exhibit in this instance not only
the same <emph>words</emph>, but the principal subordinate modifications of those
words, which occur in the tongues of the other three continents.
</p>

<p>
Further, these modifications are <emph>completely</emph> traceable in the Negro dialects
<emph>separately</emph> considered. They are also completely traceable in the
dialects of South Africa <emph>separately</emph> considered. Moreover, it may be
added, that these gradations of inflexion actually coexist in one <emph>single
class</emph> of South African dialects: <q>Uhm-to, Muhn-to, Monuna,</q> are all
found in the languages of the kindred tribes, the Koossas and Beetjuanas.
</p>

<pb n='ApA055'/><anchor id='PgApA055'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class IV.</hi>
</p>

<p>
First Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Abipones and Mokobis</hi></cell><cell>Joalé, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> Aalo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Alo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Latin Pronouns</hi></cell><cell>Ille, Illa.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Madagascar</hi></cell><cell>Lelay, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> Lahe, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Second Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi></cell><cell>Lomi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Olummi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi><note place='foot'>Illum (Latin).</note></cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Madagascar</hi></cell><cell>Olon, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> Oelun, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Malays of Formosa</hi></cell><cell>Aulon, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>N. America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn dialects</hi></cell><cell>Ahlaniah, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>
Illaniah, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> Illenni, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>
Lenno, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> Lennis, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Laniu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> Lung, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class</hi> V.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>, <q>Full of Spirits</q></cell><cell>Nouv us.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew.</hi> (Breath, Spirit, A Man)</cell><cell>N. ph. sh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Nipa, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Nippa, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> Nebeju, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Enipa, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>N. America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn dialects</hi></cell><cell>Népiou, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Napiou, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>
Nabou, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Len-nâpé, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA056'/><anchor id='PgApA056'/>

<p>
Referring to the foregoing American words, Népio and Nabou,
Du Ponceau observes, <q>Ces deux derniers semblent avoir quelque rapport
avec Len-âpé.</q> <q><hi rend='italic'>The last two seem to have some connexion with Len-âpé.</hi></q>
Lenâpé is plainly a compound of the two preceding roots, Lenno and
Napiou. The nature of these compounds, which, as above stated, may
be said to have escaped the observation of Du Ponceau, has been explained
in the preceding remarks on <q>The Heavenly Bodies.</q> Len-âpé is
a compound formed to distinguish the <emph>Male</emph> sex.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class</hi> VI.
</p>

<p>
First Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi> (To live)</cell><cell>Anah.On.h.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi> (To sigh, breathe)</cell><cell>A.n.c.h.
A.n.sh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, N.sh.e, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Kamschatka</hi></cell><cell>Ainu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Nu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, In, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Bosjesmans</hi></cell><cell>T'Na, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>N. America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn dialects</hi></cell><cell>Anini, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Inin, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Ninnee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>,
Inishiti, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi> (as above)</cell><cell>An.sh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, N sh.e, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Second Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Ungi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>
Jankueh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Nga, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Phellatahs</hi></cell><cell>Nekdo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Iroquois</hi></cell><cell>Ongué, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Greenland</hi></cell><cell>Innuk, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Agreeably to Horne Tooke's principles, the following Pronouns in other
languages may be regarded as identical with the African Nouns in the
Analysis, viz.:
</p>

<p>
The Pronoun of the Second Person, Nyu, Nai, <q>Thou</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>), may
be identified with Nu, and T'na. The Pronouns of the First Person, <q>I,</q>
<pb n='ApA057'/><anchor id='PgApA057'/>
Anok (<hi rend='italic'>Egyptian</hi>), An.c.ee (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>), Iōn ga (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>), Ngoo (<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>),
may be viewed as identical with Ungi Jankueh and Nga.<note place='foot'>Ng-ummi, and Ng-umbo, (Negro names for <q>Man,</q>) seem obviously to be compounds
of the above words, <q>Ungi, Nga,</q> with Ommo, Uhm-to, &amp;c., another word
for <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c., elsewhere noticed in this Analysis.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Further examples of both the previous Modifications of Class VI.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Being words applied to the Female Sex.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Malay</hi></cell><cell>Ina, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Turkish</hi> (A Mother)</cell><cell>Anna, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Anna, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Sapeboeans</hi></cell><cell>Anu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hungarian</hi> (A Mother)</cell><cell>Anya.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Wan, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Jankueh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Japan</hi></cell><cell>Wonna, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Wonago, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Lieu Kieu</hi></cell><cell>Einago, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>English</hi></cell><cell>Wench</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Gothic</hi></cell><cell>Uen, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Uens, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa</cell><cell>Honnes, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi> (as above)</cell><cell>A.n.sh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, N.sh.e, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Koibal</hi></cell><cell>Niausa, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Class</hi> VII.
</p>

<p>
First Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Coronas</hi></cell><cell>Kouh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Kauh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Negroland</cell><cell>Cow, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Kea, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Kaikjai, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>,
Koa, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, (<hi rend='italic'>plural.</hi>)</cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Muyscans</hi></cell><cell>Chha, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Zamucans</hi></cell><cell>Cheké, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Shawannos</hi></cell><cell>Ochechee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi> (A Body, A Person)</cell><cell>Gou.e.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Kamschatka</hi></cell><cell>Okkăijŭh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Taraikai</hi></cell><cell>Okkai, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Lasian</hi></cell><cell>Akadju, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>N. Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Berbers &amp; Dongolans</hi></cell><cell>Agikh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA058'/><anchor id='PgApA058'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words applied chiefly to Nouns Feminine.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Mantschu</hi></cell><cell>Chache, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, or Haghe, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>,
Cheche, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, or Heghe, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>S. America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Zamucans</hi> (as above)</cell><cell>Cheké, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cochimi</hi></cell><cell>Huagin, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>English</hi></cell><cell>Hag, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>German</hi></cell><cell>Hexe, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Latin Pronouns</hi></cell><cell>Hic, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Hæc, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Second Modification.<note place='foot'>There is not, in every case, a regular or broadly marked distinction between these
<q>Modifications,</q> which have been adopted to facilitate comparison rather than as being
based on strictly philological grounds.</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentot Tribes</hi></cell><cell>Kouh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Kus, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Kauh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Chai-sas, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>
K'quique, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, K'quiqis, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>
Quoique, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Kyoiqui-s, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>
Quai-scha, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Latin Pronouns</hi></cell><cell>Qui, Quis, Quisque.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Salivians</hi></cell><cell>Cocco, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Mobimans</hi></cell><cell>Coucya, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>N. America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn dialects</hi> (A Body, or Person)</cell><cell>Hakke, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Icquoi-s, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>
Esqua, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, <q>Squaw,</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
It will be observed that in the previous African words, as also in the
North American words introduced into the comparison, the Feminine is
formed by adding the letter <q><hi rend='italic'>s</hi>,</q> (as in the English Prince-<hi rend='italic'>ss</hi>); a form
which prevails widely in the most ancient languages of Europe.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Taraikai</hi> (as above)</cell><cell>Okai, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Okee-tu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Uk-assi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Georgian</hi></cell><cell>Kasi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Samoied</hi> (Men)</cell><cell>Chosowo.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Lasian</hi></cell><cell>Goz, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi></cell><cell>Gouas, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi></cell><cell>Giuzona, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Guiguienne, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Guiacar, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA059'/><anchor id='PgApA059'/>

<p>
Third Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Jakkela, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Ackala, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi><note place='foot'>Najakala and Ba cala, <hi rend='smallcaps'>M.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Negro</hi>), seem to be compounds derived from Ackala and
other roots. Ack-ala, Jakk-ela themselves seem to be compounds of <q>Kai, Hakke,</q>
&amp;c. (the class of words analysed above,) with Alo, &amp;c. terms for <q>Man,</q> noticed in
other parts of this Analysis.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Caraibs</hi></cell><cell>Oukele, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Mexico</hi></cell><cell>Oquichetle, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names for <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class</hi> VIII.
[A Modification of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Class</hi> VII.]
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi> (<q>Man,</q> as above)</cell><cell>Gou. e, or <hi rend='smallcaps'>G o v</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Pehlwi</hi></cell><cell>Gebna, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Samoied</hi></cell><cell>Chubb, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Chyb, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hottentots</hi></cell><cell>Chaib, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Kupp, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names for <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c.&mdash;</hi><hi rend='smallcaps'>Class</hi> IX.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi></cell><cell>Hoout, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Nubia &amp; Abyssinia</hi></cell><cell>Odéÿ, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> Oták, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Negro-land.</cell><cell>Ot ga, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Ot-jee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Conformably to Horne Tooke's principle, A.th.c., <q>Thou</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew,</hi>)
may be regarded as identical with Otak, Ot ga, Ot-jee, the above names for
<q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Tribes on the <q>Jenisei</q> River</hi></cell><cell>Had-kip, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>in Siberia</hi></cell><cell>At-kub, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>
Hutt, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Hitt, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>
Ket, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, K hitt, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
These words are composed of simple and of compound synonymes, both
derived from the last two classes of words.
</p>

<pb n='ApA060'/><anchor id='PgApA060'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names for <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class X.</hi>
</p>

<p>
First Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Mad, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Made, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Mutte, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Icelandic</hi></cell><cell>Mad-ur, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Kamschatka</hi></cell><cell>Māth, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Second Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Messhuhu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Muhsa, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>
Musee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Zend.</hi></cell><cell>Meshio, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Taraikai</hi></cell><cell>Mazy, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Motorian</hi></cell><cell>Misem, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Sclavonian</hi></cell><cell>Mosh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Latin.</hi></cell><cell>Mas, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi><note place='foot'>Mass-ari, Bass-ari, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi>.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Armorican</hi></cell><cell>Maues, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Muyscans</hi></cell><cell>Muysca, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Mogee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Dalmatian</hi></cell><cell>Muux, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class XI.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Ibalu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Belb, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Obellima, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa</cell><cell>Am-pele, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Vilellans</hi></cell><cell>Pelé, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA061'/><anchor id='PgApA061'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class XII.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Europe. (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi> Pronouns, and terminations of Nouns)</cell><cell><q>Is,</q> <q>Os.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi> (To Be)</cell><cell>Esse.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi> (<q>To Be</q>)</cell><cell>E c . sh.
A . ee . sh (Vir.) A . sh . e (Fœmina.)<note place='foot'>She&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Osse, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, See, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>
Uzu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Turkish</hi>&mdash;Uz, <q>Self,</q> Himself, Myself.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi></cell><cell>Zohee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Zohee-s, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi> (Life)</cell><cell>Zo-ē.</cell></row>
<row><cell>(To live)</cell><cell>Zoō.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names for <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class XIII.</hi>
</p>

<p>
First Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Affghan</hi></cell><cell>Meru, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Zend</hi></cell><cell>Merete, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Persian</hi></cell><cell>Mard, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi></cell><cell>Mart-ja, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi></cell><cell>Mari-tus, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Mar-is.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Second Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Georgian</hi></cell><cell>K-mari, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Ka<hi rend='italic'>mere</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Third Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Nu-<hi rend='italic'>mero</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Algon. dialects.</hi></cell><cell>Né-<hi rend='italic'>marough</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA062'/><anchor id='PgApA062'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Man, Woman,</q> &amp;c.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class XIV.</hi>
</p>

<p>
[Applied chiefly to the <emph>Female</emph> Sex.]
</p>

<p>
First Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi> (A Woman)</cell><cell>Gun . ē, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Russian</hi></cell><cell>Jena, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi> (<q>The Mother of the Gods</q>)</cell><cell><q>Juno.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi></cell><cell>Jani, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (Janoni, A Mother.)</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Jonnu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Djonnu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Junoo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi><note place='foot'>Two dominant ideas pervade the words of this class, viz. those of 1, Birth; and 2,
Existence in the abstract. As words expressive of ideas of the second class are regarded
by philosophical writers as <emph>derivatives</emph>, the idea of Birth, as in the Greek words Genn-ao,
Gun-ē, Genn-ētor, may be viewed as the <emph>primary</emph> and <emph>proper</emph> sense.</note></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
The identity of the Negro word <q>Junoo</q> with the Latin <q>Juno,</q> is a remarkable
feature in this comparison.
</p>

<p>
<q>Janoni, a Mother, in Sanscrit,</q> it is observed in an able article in the
Edinburgh Review,<note place='foot'>Vol. XIII., p. 373, Review of Wilkins's Sanscrit Grammar.</note> <q>is the manifest origin of the Latin appellation of
<hi rend='italic'>the mother of the Gods</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Second Modification.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Woman.</q></hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Mocobis</hi></cell><cell>Coenac, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Omaguans</hi></cell><cell>Cunia, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi></cell><cell>Aukona, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA063'/><anchor id='PgApA063'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Man,</q></hi> (Vir and Homo.)
</p>

<p>
First Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Gonee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>M.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Mongol</hi></cell><cell>Kun, <hi rend='smallcaps'>M.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Jukadshires</hi></cell><cell>Kun sch, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Second Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>South Africa</cell><cell>T'kohn, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Dikkom, Dim, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Tewe, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>&mdash;Dae, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> &amp; <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></note></cell></row>
<row><cell>N. America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn dialects</hi></cell><cell>Tchainan, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Corea</hi></cell><cell>Tchin, <hi rend='smallcaps'>H.</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Irish and Welsh</hi></cell><cell>Duine, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Dean, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA064'/><anchor id='PgApA064'/>

<p>
Names Of <q>The Hand.</q>
</p>

<p>
The African words of this Class collected by Adelung are thirty-six in
number. Of these, twenty-nine belong to the languages of the region of
pure Negroes. In the following Analysis the whole of these words have
been shown to be related to analogous words used in the other great
divisions of the Globe.<note place='foot'>There are only two African words of this class, which have been left unnoticed in
the analysis, viz. Blimozeh, <q>The Hand,</q> a Negro word, apparently related to <q>Bulla,</q>
another Negro word for <q>The Hand,</q> probably allied also to <q>Pal-ma,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>;) and
Neworeh. <q>The Hand,</q> used by the <hi rend='italic'>Phellatahs</hi>, a tribe of North Africa, who inhabit a
tract contiguous to Negro-land. These exceptions are too trifling to call for any qualification
of the generality of the above statement.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of <q>The Hand.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class I.</hi>
</p>

<p>
First Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Mexico</hi></cell><cell>Tom.</cell></row>
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Nubia</hi></cell><cell>Tedembeton.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi> (<q>To feel</q>)</cell><cell>Teim-law.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>English</hi></cell><cell><q>Thumb.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>German</hi> (The Thumb)</cell><cell>Daum.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi> (To perceive, discern, taste)</cell><cell>Tom.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi> (Tongue)</cell><cell>Tamma, and T'inn.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>English</hi></cell><cell>Tongue.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
There are numerous examples to show that the words for the Tongue
and the Taste of the <emph>Palate</emph> are in many, if not in all cases, terms thus
applied in a <emph>secondary</emph> sense, which, in their <emph>primary</emph> meaning, were applied
to <q><hi rend='italic'>The Hand</hi>,</q> and its Perceptive Functions. Compare the words
which occur hereafter (under <q>The Names for the Hand.&mdash;Class X.</q>)
Tusso, <q>The Hand</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Negro</hi>); Dāst, <q>The Hand</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Persian</hi>); Tast-en, <q>To
<hi rend='italic'>grope</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>); <q>Taste</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>).
</p>

<pb n='ApA065'/><anchor id='PgApA065'/>

<p>
The names for <q>The Hand,</q> and its Functions, have also given rise to
numerous words metaphorically expressive of mental operations, as in the
above examples: Tom, <q>The Hand</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mexican</hi>); Tom, To Taste, To
Discern, Discernment, Judgment (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>); Tam-ias, A Judge (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>);
Doom, <q>Dooms-day</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Second Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Dinde, Ninde, Nindi.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Madagascar</hi></cell><cell>Tangh, Tangam, Tangan.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi></cell><cell>T'unka.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Malays</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Tribes on the <q>Jenisei</q> River, in Siberia</hi></cell><cell>Tangan, Tögon, Tono.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Kamschatka</hi></cell><cell>Tono.</cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hudson's Bay.</hi> <q>The Hand</q></cell><cell>Tene-law.</cell></row>
<row><cell><q>The Tongue</q></cell><cell>Tene-thoun.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
In these American dialects <q>Tene</q> is a general prefix to the names of
the senses; <q>Law</q> is the <emph>distinctive</emph> name of the Hand; <q>Toun</q> the <emph>distinctive</emph>
name of the Tongue, &amp;c.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>English</hi></cell><cell>Tongue.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Latin Verbs</hi></cell><cell>Tang-o, Teneo.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of <q>The Hand.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class II.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Coronas</hi></cell><cell>T'koam.</cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Poconchi</hi></cell><cell>Cam.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi> (A <hi rend='italic'>Hand</hi>-full)</cell><cell>K. m ts.</cell></row>
<row><cell>(To grasp, To lay hold of)</cell><cell>K. m. t.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi> (To take)</cell><cell>Kum-meryd.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of <q>The Hand.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class III.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Bulla.</cell></row>
<row><cell>(Hand and Arm)</cell><cell>Bulla.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Persian</hi> (The Arm)</cell><cell>B.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA066'/><anchor id='PgApA066'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of <q>The Hand.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class IV.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Obaa.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Gothic &amp; Anglo-Saxon</hi> (To have)</cell><cell>Hab-an. Häb-ban.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi></cell><cell>Hab-ere.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of <q>The hand.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class V.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Ononuba.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Mossans</hi></cell><cell>Nubou, Nuboupé.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of <q>The Hand.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class VI.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi> (The Hand and Front Arm)</cell><cell>Koi.</cell></row>
<row><cell>(The Hand)</cell><cell>Gig.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Kook Coco. Kogo. Okuh, Hukko.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Finland</hi></cell><cell>Kchesi.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Lapland</hi></cell><cell>Chketsch. Chkatsch.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Hungarian</hi></cell><cell>Keez.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Arabic</hi> (Cubitus)</cell><cell>Caa.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Tamul</hi>  (Hand)</cell><cell>Kei.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Georgian</hi></cell><cell>Che.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Persian</hi></cell><cell>Kef, or Gef.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Quasi Quumuq</hi></cell><cell>Kujä.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Ossetian</hi></cell><cell>Koch, Kuch.</cell></row>
<row><cell>N. America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Nootka Sound</hi></cell><cell>Kook-elixo.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Tschitketans</hi></cell><cell>Katchicou.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Ugaljachmutzi</hi></cell><cell>Kajak-az.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Senecas</hi></cell><cell>Kaschuchta.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>St. Barbara's</hi></cell><cell>Huachajâ.</cell></row>
<row><cell>S. America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Araucans</hi></cell><cell>Cuu, Cuugh.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Brazils</hi></cell><cell>Gepo.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Yarurans</hi></cell><cell>Icchi-mo.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA067'/><anchor id='PgApA067'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of <q>The Hand.</q></hi>-<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class VII.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The following may be regarded as modifications of the foregoing Class
of words:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi> [Allied to
Gig, <q>The Hand,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi>) above mentioned]</cell><cell>Shig.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Beetjuanas</hi></cell><cell>Sseak-ja.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;[Language of the <hi rend='italic'>Garrau Mountains</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>N.E.</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Bengal</hi>]</cell><cell>Zjâk.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Georgian</hi></cell><cell>Shi.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi></cell><cell>Zjiu, Ziu.</cell></row>
<row><cell>N. America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Fitzhugh Sound</hi></cell><cell>Shou-shey.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Aschi.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi></cell><cell>Escua.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
The words used in the last two Classes of examples as <q><emph>Names</emph></q> for
<q>The Hand,</q> may be identified in the most unequivocal manner in other
instances, as <emph>Verbs</emph> descriptive of some distinctive Functions of the Hand.
</p>

<p>
Compare Coco, Okuh, Hukko, <hi rend='italic'>Negro</hi> names for <q>The Hand,</q> with the
verbs Kō, <q>To take,</q> Ek-ō, <q>To hold, have, act</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>); Ago (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Compare Aschi (<hi rend='italic'>Negro</hi>), Escua (<hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>), with Esch-ŏn, Isch-ein,
Sch-ein, <q>To hold,</q> <q>To have</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Compare Katchicou, <hi rend='italic'>North American</hi>, and Chkatsch, <hi rend='italic'>Lapland</hi>, names
for <q>The Hand,</q> with <q>Catch</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Compare Kef, or Gef (<hi rend='italic'>Persian</hi>), and Gepo <q>The Hand</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Brazilian</hi>),
with Give (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>), Geb-en (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Compare Kaschuchtah, <hi rend='italic'>North American</hi>, and Khesi, <hi rend='italic'>Fin</hi>, names for the
Hand, with the verbs Keisio, <q>To search for</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>), Guess (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>);
verbs derived from G.sh, <q>To feel, search for, with the Hand</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>).
</p>

<pb n='ApA068'/><anchor id='PgApA068'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of <q>The Hand.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class VIII.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi> (The Hand and Forearm)</cell><cell>A.m.e.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi> (<q>A Finger,</q> <q>The Right Hand</q>)</cell><cell>Ee.m.ee.n. Ee.m.n.e. Ee.m.ee.n.th.</cell></row>
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi>. The Hand and Forearm)</cell><cell>Mah, Mahe.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi> (Hand)</cell><cell>Omma.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Sapibocans</hi></cell><cell>Eme.</cell></row>
<row><cell>[See A.m.e (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>) above.] <hi rend='italic'>Zamucans</hi></cell><cell>Yumanai.</cell></row>
<row><cell>[See Ee.m.n.e (<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>) above.] <hi rend='italic'>Salivians</hi></cell><cell>Immomo.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
The following may be viewed as modifications of the previous words:<note place='foot'>On this subject the analysis of Manee and other analogous African words for <q>Man.</q>
See also Observations on the Algonguyn Dialects of North America</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Lagoa Bay</hi></cell><cell>Mundha.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi></cell><cell>Manus.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of <q>The hand.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class IX.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Ensah, Ensaa.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Caffres</hi></cell><cell>Fansah.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi> (<q>Handle</q>)</cell><cell>Ansa or Hansa.<note place='foot'><q>Ansa, for Hansa,</q> supine of Hendo, whence <q>Pre-hendo</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>).&mdash;Valpy's Etym.
Latin Dict.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi> (To seize or hold)</cell><cell>Pré-hendo.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Danish, Icelandic, English, and German</hi></cell><cell>Haand, Hond, Hand.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi> (To take)</cell><cell>Chandano.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia, North.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Tribes on the <q>Jenisei</q> River, Siberia</hi></cell><cell>Kenar, Kenaran.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA069'/><anchor id='PgApA069'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of <q>The Hand.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class X.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Berber</hi></cell><cell>Idd-egh.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew and Arabic</hi></cell><cell>Eed, Ied.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Pehlwi</hi></cell><cell>Jede-man.<note place='foot'>Apparently a compound of Eed or Ied, and Man-us.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Sumoied, Koibal, and Motorian</hi></cell><cell>Uda, Oda, Udam.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of <q>The Hand.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class XI.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Phellatahs</hi></cell><cell>Youngo.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Nakoa.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots of Saldana Bay</hi></cell><cell>Onekoa.</cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cochimi</hi></cell><cell>Nagona.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Miamis</hi></cell><cell>Onexca. Enahkee.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Iroquois</hi></cell><cell>Eniage.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Algon. dialects</hi></cell><cell>Nachk. Naak.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>English</hi> (Adroitness in any Handy-craft)</cell><cell>Knack.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>English</hi> (Joints of the Fingers)</cell><cell>Knuck-les.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Maipurans</hi></cell><cell>Nucápe.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of <q>The Hand.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class XII.</hi>
</p>

<p>
First Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Bosjesmans</hi></cell><cell>T'aa.</cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Mixtecans</hi></cell><cell>Daha.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi> (The Right hand)</cell><cell>Dahai.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA070'/><anchor id='PgApA070'/>

<p>
Second Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Persian and Kurd</hi></cell><cell>Dā-st.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Armenian</hi></cell><cell>Tzjern.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Tusso.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>German</hi> (A Claw, a Paw)</cell><cell>Tatze.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>German</hi> (To <hi rend='italic'>grope</hi>)</cell><cell>Tast-en.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>English</hi> (applied to the Palate)</cell><cell><q>Taste.</q></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Third Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Kamschatka</hi></cell><cell>Tegi.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>English</hi> (A Verb)</cell><cell><q>Take.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Taraikai</hi></cell><cell>Dēk.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi> (The Right Hand)</cell><cell>Dex-tra.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi> (To take)</cell><cell>Dekomai.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of <q>The Hand.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class XIII.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Be.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;Tribes on the <hi rend='italic'>Jenisei, Siberia</hi></cell><cell>Phjaga.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Siam</hi></cell><cell>Pfan.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi></cell><cell>Pau-en.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>English</hi> (applied to animals)</cell><cell>Paw.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Brazils</hi></cell><cell>Poh, Po.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Omaguans</hi></cell><cell>Pua.</cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Mic-Macs</hi></cell><cell>Peton.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of <q>The Hand.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class XIV.</hi>
</p>

<p>
First Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Alo, Allo.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Turkish</hi></cell><cell>Ell, Elli.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;(An old Teutonic word applied to the Cubit, or Forearm)</cell><cell>Ell, Elle.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>English</hi></cell><cell>El-bow.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA071'/><anchor id='PgApA071'/>

<p>
Second Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Loho.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi></cell><cell>La-o-u.</cell></row>
<row><cell>America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Chippewayans</hi></cell><cell>Lah.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Hudson's Bay</hi> (<q>The Hand</q>)</cell><cell>Tene<note place='foot'>Tene in this dialect is prefixed to the names of the senses generally. Law, for instance,
is the distinctive name of <q>The Hand,</q> Thoun is that of <q>The Tongue,</q> obviously
connected with <q>Tongue,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>).</note>-Law.</cell></row>
<row><cell>(<q>The Tongue</q>)</cell><cell>Tene-Thoun.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Third Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi> (Allied to the Negro word Loho, <q>The Hand,</q> above)</cell><cell>Loco.</cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Penobscot</hi></cell><cell>Oleechee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Tibet</hi></cell><cell>Lag.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Georgian</hi></cell><cell>Cheli.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>English</hi> (Applied to animals)</cell><cell>Claw.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi> (The Hand)</cell><cell>Glak.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ingumian</hi></cell><cell>Kulku.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Fourth Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi> (The Hand and Front Arm, the Cubit)</cell><cell>Olē n . ē.</cell></row>
<row><cell>N. America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Pennsylvania</hi></cell><cell>Olœnskam. Alœn-skam.</cell></row>
<row><cell>New Sweden.</cell><cell>Olœnskan. Alœnskan.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA072'/><anchor id='PgApA072'/>

<p>
Words For <q>The Tongue.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the following Analysis all the South African words, and also all the
Negro words of this class, with the exception of <q>Teckramme,</q> (probably
a compound,) have been shown to be unequivocally connected with important
analogous terms in the languages of the other great Continents.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi>,&mdash;Tamma Tamme, T'inn.<note place='foot'><q>Dem gall, Dein gall</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Fulahs</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Phellatahs</hi>, North Africa), seem to be compounds
of these words, with another root.</note>) See these words illustrated
among the words for <q>The Hand.</q> See also, under the same head, for
examples of the principle that the words applied to <q>The Tongue,</q> and its
Perceptive Functions, are in many, if not in most cases, secondary or
Metaphorical applications of words originally applied to <q>The Hand,</q> and
its Perceptive Functions; as in Tasten, <q>To grope,</q> <hi rend='italic'>German</hi>; <q>Taste,</q>
applied to the <q><hi rend='italic'>Palate</hi>,</q> <hi rend='italic'>English</hi>. The next words present additional
examples of the same principle.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Lamai, Lammegue, Lamin, Laming.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gaelic</hi>&mdash;Lam, <q>The Hand;</q> <hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>&mdash;Lam-bano, <q>To take;</q> <hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>&mdash;Lam-bo,
To lick with <hi rend='italic'>the Tongue</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Dali;<note place='foot'>Del emme (<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>), <q>The Tongue,</q> seems to be a compound of the second
and third classes.</note> <hi rend='italic'>Malays</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Formosa</hi>&mdash;Dadila; <hi rend='italic'>Turkish</hi>&mdash;Dil; <hi rend='italic'>North
America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Nagailers</hi>)&mdash;Thoula.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Madagascar, &amp; Caffres</hi>)&mdash;Lella, Leula, Lolemi; <hi rend='italic'>North
America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Penobscot</hi>)&mdash;Wee-laulo; <hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>&mdash;Laleo, <q>To speak;</q> Lalia,
<q>Speech.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Ning; <hi rend='italic'>Georgian</hi>&mdash;Nina; <hi rend='italic'>Lasian</hi>&mdash;Nena, Nen; <hi rend='italic'>South America</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Kiriri</hi>)&mdash;Nunu.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi>&mdash;La sh; <hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>&mdash;L. sh . on . n; <hi rend='italic'>Armenian</hi>&mdash;Ljesu; <hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Caffres</hi>)&mdash;Loodjem.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Essiénkó; <hi rend='italic'>Old German</hi>&mdash;Zunka; <hi rend='italic'>Modern German</hi>&mdash;Zunge.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Pehlwi</hi>, <q>Hosuan.</q> The close connexion between the German and the Pehlwi, and
the other dialects of Persia, is indisputable.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Koossas</hi>)&mdash;Müme; <hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>&mdash;Mi; <hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>&mdash;Mihia, Minni.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>North Africa</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Berbers</hi>)&mdash;Narka; <hi rend='italic'>South America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Maupurian</hi>)&mdash;Nuore;
<hi rend='italic'>Caraibs</hi>&mdash;Nourou.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>North Africa</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Dongolan</hi>)&mdash;Nadka; <hi rend='italic'>South America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Betoan</hi>)&mdash;Ineca.
</p>

<pb n='ApA073'/><anchor id='PgApA073'/>

<p>
Words For <q>The Ear.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Szemman-kó; <hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>&mdash;Sh.m.o, <q>To hear.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Asse Asshabe;<note place='foot'>South Africa, Zebé, &amp;c.</note> <hi rend='italic'>Abyssinia</hi>&mdash;Ishenha Ashenha; <hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>&mdash;A.z.n.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Uwasso; <hi rend='italic'>Bohemian</hi>&mdash;Ussi; <hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>&mdash;Ouas, Ous.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Otuh (Otto, <q>Ears</q>); <hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>&mdash;Ōta (<q>Ears</q>); <hi rend='italic'>North America</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Knistenaux</hi>)&mdash;Otoweegie.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Caffres</hi>)&mdash;Gevea; <hi rend='italic'>Kurd</hi>&mdash;Guh; <hi rend='italic'>Samoied</hi>&mdash;Ko, Kuo.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>North Africa</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Berbers</hi>)&mdash;Ukkegá; <hi rend='italic'>Selavonian</hi>&mdash;Ucho; <hi rend='italic'>North America</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Shawannos</hi>)&mdash;Ochtowaga; <hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>&mdash;Akou-o (<q>To hear</q>).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>North Africa</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Dongolans</hi>)&mdash;Ulûk; <hi rend='italic'>Coriac</hi>&mdash;Wilugi; <hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>&mdash;Uhl.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;T'no-eingtu, T'naum, T'nunka; <hi rend='italic'>Bucharian</hi>&mdash;Dehâu.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi>&mdash;Meeje; <hi rend='italic'>Japan</hi>&mdash;Mimi.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Toy; <hi rend='italic'>Esquimaux</hi>&mdash;Tehui; <hi rend='italic'>Brazil</hi>&mdash;Ty.
</p>

<p>
The majority of the words of the next two Classes (names of <q>The Foot</q>
and <q>The Head,</q>) will be found to admit of a satisfactory explanation.
The exceptions are more numerous than in the instance of the words for
<q>The Hand;</q> but it must be borne in mind that these exceptions do not
at all serve to invalidate the inferences that flow from numerous unequivocal
examples of a different nature. This combination of many features of
difference with numerous points of resemblance is the direct result of the
tendency of each race to abandon a portion of the synonymes originally
common to all the various races of mankind.
</p>

<pb n='ApA074'/><anchor id='PgApA074'/>

<p>
Words For <q>The Foot.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;(Foot and Leg) Sing; <hi rend='italic'>German</hi>&mdash;Schenkel; <hi rend='italic'>English</hi>&mdash;Shank.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi>)&mdash;Coap and T'keib; <hi rend='italic'>Affghan</hi>&mdash;Ch pé; <hi rend='italic'>Abassian</hi>&mdash;Sh pe;
<hi rend='italic'>South America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Mokobis</hi>)&mdash;Capiate.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Trippe; <hi rend='italic'>German</hi>-Tripp-en, <q>To go,</q> Treppen (<q>Steps</q>)
<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>&mdash;<q>Trip.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Itta; <hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>&mdash;It-er, <q>A Journey,</q> It-um, <q>Gone;</q> the participle
of the Latin verb Eo, <q>To go;</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zend</hi>&mdash;Jeieta, <q>He goes.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>S. Africa</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi>)&mdash;Y and Yi; <hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi>&mdash;I, <q>To go;</q> <hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>&mdash;Eo, <q>I go.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi>)&mdash;Ir-qua; <hi rend='italic'>South America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Zamucans</hi>)&mdash;Irie;
<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>&mdash;Ire, <q>To go;</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zend</hi>&mdash;Harra, <q>I go.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Gann; <hi rend='italic'>Greenland</hi>&mdash;Kannak; <hi rend='italic'>German</hi>&mdash;Gehen, <q>To go,</q>
(Gegangen, <q>Gone</q>); <hi rend='italic'>Scotch</hi>&mdash;Gang; <hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;It-genge; apparently
a compound of the last with a word previously explained.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Nugee; <hi rend='italic'>Sclaronic</hi>&mdash;Noga; <hi rend='italic'>South America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Maupurians</hi>)&mdash;Nuchü,
Nucsi.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi>&mdash;Rat; <hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>&mdash;Rodio, <q>To walk.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Afo; <hi rend='italic'>South America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Vilellans</hi>)&mdash;Apé; <hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>&mdash;Pe, Pe-s.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>North Africa</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Fulahs and Phellatahs</hi>)&mdash;Kússengál, Kavassongal; <hi rend='italic'>Jeniseians</hi>&mdash;Kassa;
<hi rend='italic'>Mingrelian</hi>&mdash;Kutchi; <hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>&mdash;Koes, <q>A Leg;</q> <hi rend='italic'>North
America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Shawannos</hi>)&mdash;Kussie.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Akkau, Ugod; <hi rend='smallcaps'>N. W.</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>America</hi> and <hi rend='smallcaps'>N. E.</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Asia</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Tschuktsches</hi>)&mdash;Iguk; (<hi rend='italic'>Kadjak</hi>)&mdash;Igugu; <hi rend='italic'>Turkish</hi>&mdash;Ajak, Ajag.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Kulu, Kolo; <hi rend='italic'>Mongol</hi>&mdash;Kull, Koll.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Tangue; <hi rend='italic'>North America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Mixtecan</hi>)&mdash;Tohuan <q>Feet;</q> <hi rend='italic'>South
Africa</hi>&mdash;Tóoh; <hi rend='italic'>English</hi>&mdash;Toe; <hi rend='italic'>Saxon</hi>&mdash;Da; <hi rend='italic'>Dutch</hi>&mdash;Deen.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Nubia</hi>&mdash;Regget; <hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>&mdash;R . g . l.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>S. Africa</hi>&mdash;Lefack; <hi rend='italic'>English</hi>&mdash;Leg; <hi rend='italic'>Wogul</hi>&mdash;Lagyl; <hi rend='italic'>Pehlwi</hi>&mdash;Lager-man.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;E'ns-zih, and (<hi rend='italic'>Caffre</hi>) En-jau, appear to be allied to the
<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>&mdash;Eo, Eundo; <hi rend='italic'>Italian</hi>&mdash;And-are; <hi rend='italic'>English</hi>&mdash;Wend, Went;
<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>&mdash;Wenden.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;Hoots; <hi rend='italic'>Armenian</hi>&mdash;Oat, Woat; <hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>&mdash;Wad-n; <hi rend='italic'>German</hi>&mdash;Wad-en,
<q>To go;</q> <hi rend='italic'>English</hi>&mdash;<q>Wade;</q> <hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi>&mdash;<q>Vad-o.</q>
</p>

<pb n='ApA075'/><anchor id='PgApA075'/>

<p>
Words For <q>The Head.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Kung, Koon, Ikkungee, Ukkoong; <hi rend='italic'>Brazilian</hi>&mdash;Acang,
Yahange; <hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>&mdash;Ken; (<hi rend='italic'>German</hi>&mdash;König; <hi rend='italic'>English</hi>&mdash;King, i.e. <q>A
Head.</q>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;Olo, Loha; <hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>&mdash;Ol, <q>Above,</q> <q>To ascend;</q> <hi rend='italic'>Motorian</hi>&mdash;Ulu,
<q>A Head.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;Klogo; <hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi>&mdash;Kloigean; <hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>&mdash;Ben-glog, <q>A Skull;</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>&mdash;G. l. g. l. th, (The Human Skull, Golgotha); <hi rend='italic'>Armenian</hi>&mdash;Kluch;
<hi rend='italic'>Jeniseians</hi>&mdash;Kolkä;<note place='foot'>Hence, apparently, Lücko, Loko,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi>.</note> <hi rend='italic'>Sclavonian</hi>&mdash;Golowa <q>A Head.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi>&mdash;Kahi, Jo; <hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Go, Ko, Kujuoo; <hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;Kŏhho;
<hi rend='italic'>Jeniseians</hi>&mdash;Koïgo; <hi rend='italic'>German</hi>&mdash;Kopf.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Ta, Tu; <hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi>&mdash;Dooha; <hi rend='italic'>Georgian</hi>&mdash;T'awi; <hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>&mdash;T'eu;
<hi rend='italic'>North America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Nagailers</hi>)&mdash;Thie.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Tabu; <hi rend='italic'>Persian</hi>&mdash;Tab, (<q>Top;</q>) <hi rend='italic'>German</hi>&mdash;Topp; <hi rend='italic'>North
America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Mohegans</hi>)&mdash;Dup, Utup, (<q>Head.</q>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Fulahs</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Phellatahs</hi>&mdash;Hore, Horde; <hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi>&mdash;Or, <q>To rise.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi>)&mdash;Biquäau; <hi rend='italic'>South America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Aymarans</hi>)&mdash;Pegke;
<hi rend='italic'>North America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>New England</hi>)&mdash;Bequoquo; <hi rend='italic'>English</hi>&mdash;Peak,
Beak.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi>&mdash;Minung; <hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi>&mdash;Mien, <q>The Face;</q> <hi rend='italic'>English</hi>&mdash;<q>Mien,</q>
and <hi rend='italic'>French</hi>&mdash;<q>Mine.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Oitju, Ithu; <hi rend='italic'>South America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Zamucans</hi>)&mdash;Yatoitac; <hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>&mdash;Yaad;
<hi rend='italic'>English</hi>&mdash;Head, Height.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Boppe, Bapp; <hi rend='italic'>South America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Yaoans</hi>)&mdash;Boppe; (<hi rend='italic'>Caraibs</hi>)&mdash;Opoupou;
<hi rend='italic'>North America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Woccons</hi>)&mdash;Poppe.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>South Africa</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi>)&mdash;T'naa; <hi rend='italic'>Isle of Man</hi>&mdash;Tchynn.
</p>

<pb n='ApA076'/><anchor id='PgApA076'/>

<p>
Words For <q>Water.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class I.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi></cell><cell>Ouata.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Russian</hi></cell><cell>Ouade.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Swedish</hi></cell><cell>Wat-n.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>English</hi></cell><cell>Wat-er, <q>Wet.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi> (<q>Moist</q>)</cell><cell>Ud-us.</cell></row>
<row><cell>N. America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Algonquyn dialects</hi></cell><cell>Wt-achsu.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Cora</hi> (<q>The Sea</q>)</cell><cell>Vaat.<note place='foot'><q>Water,</q> Ahti, Cora,&mdash;Atl, <hi rend='italic'>Mexico</hi>.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Mexico</hi> (<q>The Sea</q>)</cell><cell>Veyat-l.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
It will be observed that the root or common base of all these words is
the same as that of <q>Wet, Wat-er,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>English.</hi>) They differ only in those
grammatical inflexions in which various words of the same language
differ.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Water.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class II.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi> (<q>Aquæ</q>)</cell><cell>Eiooue.</cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Woccons</hi></cell><cell>Eau.<note place='foot'>Eau, <q>Water,</q> <hi rend='italic'>French</hi>.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Cheerokees</hi></cell><cell>Auwa.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Muskohges</hi></cell><cell>Wewa.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi></cell><cell>Wy, or Gwy.</cell></row>
<row><cell>[Hence the name of the River]</cell><cell><q>The Wye.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Icelandic</hi></cell><cell>Aa.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Anglo-Saxon</hi></cell><cell>Ea, Eia.<note place='foot'>Iâ, <q>Ice,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Kamschatka</hi></cell><cell>Ja, Ii.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Samoied</hi></cell><cell>Ii, I.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Ji.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Guaranian</hi></cell><cell>Ī, I.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Brazilian</hi></cell><cell>Y.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA077'/><anchor id='PgApA077'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Water.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class III.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Chikkasahs</hi></cell><cell>O kah, Ookaw.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi></cell><cell>Oixe.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi></cell><cell>Aqua.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Quicuans</hi></cell><cell>Yacu.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Water.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class IV.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Quicuans</hi></cell><cell>Unu.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Nu.</cell></row>
<row><cell>N. America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Kolushians</hi></cell><cell>Iin, Jin.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Inssuo, Ensu.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Water.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class V.</hi>
</p>

<p>
[The words of this Class appear to be compounds of words of the last
two Classes.]
</p>

<p>
Compare the previous words for Water, viz.:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Europe&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Irish</hi></cell><cell><hi rend='italic'>Oixe</hi>,</cell></row>
<row><cell>North America&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Chikkasahs</hi></cell><cell><hi rend='italic'>Okah, Ookaw</hi>.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
with the following words:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Oneidas</hi></cell><cell>Oghnacauno.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Greek and Latin. (The Ocean)</hi></cell><cell>Ō keano, or Ōkeano-s.</cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Senecas</hi></cell><cell>Oneekanoosh.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Muynckussar</hi></cell><cell>Oneegha.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Anam</hi></cell><cell>Nuock, Nak.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Coriac</hi> (The Sea)</cell><cell>Anchon, Ancho.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Enchion.<note place='foot'>There are other analogous words,&mdash;Endschey, <q>Water,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>, Ente, <q>A
Duck,</q> i.e. <q>A Water Fowl,</q> <hi rend='italic'>German</hi>.</note></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA078'/><anchor id='PgApA078'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Water.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class VI.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Gallas</hi></cell><cell>Bischan.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Circassian</hi></cell><cell>Pishi.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Kurilians</hi></cell><cell>Pi, Peh.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Samoied</hi></cell><cell>Bi, Be.</cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Delawares</hi></cell><cell>Beh.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>New Sweden</hi></cell><cell>Bij.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi> (To drink)</cell><cell>Pi-ō.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi> (To drink)</cell><cell>Bi-b-o.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Water.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class VII.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Asioué.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Mongol</hi>, Usu; <hi rend='italic'>Tibet</hi>, <q>Tschu.</q></note></cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Jeso</hi></cell><cell>Azui.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>North America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Azanax</hi>), Eslenes.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi></cell><cell>Shui.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Turkish</hi></cell><cell>Schuy, Su.</cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Runsienes</hi></cell><cell>Ziy.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Water.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class VIII.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Dongolans</hi></cell><cell>Esseg.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Irish or Gaelic</hi></cell><cell>Eask, Uisge.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Welsh or Celtic of Britain</hi>. [British Names of Streams]</cell><cell>The <q>Esk,</q> The <q>Usk.</q></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
These Celtic words are the chief basis of Edward Llwyd's theory, that
the Britons were preceded by a Gaelic tribe, who gave names to these
streams. The extreme antiquity of these words is certain:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Swedish</hi> (To wash)</cell><cell>Wase a.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Old German</hi></cell><cell>Wask-en, Wasc-an.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA079'/><anchor id='PgApA079'/>

<p>
The following five Classes of words, from VIII. to XIV., may be regarded
as mutually connected.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Water.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class IX.</hi>
</p>

<p>
First Modification.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Abyssinia</hi></cell><cell>Mi, Me.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi></cell><cell>Mōou, Mau.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi> (Seas)</cell><cell>Amaiou.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi> (Water)</cell><cell>Améh.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Chinese</hi></cell><cell>Moi, Mui.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Pehlwi</hi></cell><cell>Mea.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi></cell><cell>Me, (Meem).</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi> (The Sea)</cell><cell>Ee . am, or Jam.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Japan</hi> (The Sea)</cell><cell>Umi.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Arabic</hi> (Water)</cell><cell>Ma.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Vilellans</hi></cell><cell>Ma.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Aymarans</hi></cell><cell>Huma.</cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cherokees</hi></cell><cell>Amma.</cell></row>
<row><cell>[Compare the above <hi rend='italic'>Negro</hi> word Améh.]</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi></cell><cell>Hum-or.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Adjective</hi>, <q>Wet</q></cell><cell>Hum-idus.</cell></row>
<row><cell>[Compare Huma, <q>Water.</q> <hi rend='italic'>South American</hi>, above; and Umi, <q>The Sea,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Japan</hi>), above.]</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Water.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class X.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Mage.</cell></row>
<row><cell>North America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Greenland</hi></cell><cell>Imack.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Tschuktsches</hi></cell><cell>Emak, Mok.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Araucan</hi></cell><cell>Mouke.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Latin &amp; English</hi></cell><cell>Muc-us.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>English</hi></cell><cell>Muggy.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew</hi> (To flow, dissolve)</cell><cell>M. g.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA080'/><anchor id='PgApA080'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Water.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class XI.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi> (To irrigate, To drink)</cell><cell>Matsos.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>, Water</cell><cell>Mazei. Mazia. Masa.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa</cell><cell>Maasi, Meetsi. Matee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Japan</hi></cell><cell>Mizzu, Midz. Misi.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi> (Wet)</cell><cell>Mad-idus.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>English</hi></cell><cell><q>Mizzle</q>, Moist. Mist.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Water.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class XII.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Berbers</hi></cell><cell>Amanga.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi> (Ram) (A Torrent, A Stream)</cell><cell>Mounoshe. Mouns-ōr. em.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Caffre Tribes</hi></cell><cell>Amaansi. Amaanzu.</cell></row>
<row><cell>N. America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Nadowessians</hi></cell><cell>Ménâ. Meneh.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Koibal</hi> (A Stream)</cell><cell>Meanlai.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Chaldee</hi> (Waters)</cell><cell>Main.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Latin</hi> (To flow)</cell><cell>Man-o.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA081'/><anchor id='PgApA081'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names for <q>Water.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class XIII.</hi>
</p>

<p>
[Apparently connected with <hi rend='smallcaps'>Class IX.</hi>]
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Heb.</hi> <q>The Sea,</q> (as above)</cell><cell>Jam, or Ee . am.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Tibet</hi> (<q>The Sea</q>)</cell><cell>Gjiamzo.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Kurd</hi> (A Stream)</cell><cell>Tcham.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentot Tribes</hi> (Water)</cell><cell>Kam, Kamme, T'kamme.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Water.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class XIV.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Koro.</cell></row>
<row><cell>North Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Afnu</hi></cell><cell>Grua.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Pelu</hi> (<q>Rain</q>)</cell><cell>Chuura.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Tuschi</hi> (<q>Rain</q>)</cell><cell>Kare.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Kalmuck</hi> (Rain)</cell><cell>Chura.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Armenian</hi> (Water)</cell><cell>Tschu r.<note place='foot'>Dour, Water, (<hi rend='italic'>Welsh</hi>); Jura, <q>The Sea,</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Lettish.</hi>) Ejern (<hi rend='italic'>Abyssinian</hi>), <q>Water,</q>
seems also to be connected with <q>Tschur,</q> <q>Jura,</q> &amp;c.</note></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Water.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class XV.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>N. Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egypt</hi> (A Stream)</cell><cell>Eïoor.</cell></row>
<row><cell>(Water)</cell><cell>Erōn.</cell></row>
<row><cell>South Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Madagascar</hi></cell><cell>Rano, Rana. Ranu.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>English</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Anglo-Saxon</hi> <q>Pluvia</q></cell><cell>Rain.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi> <q>Flowing</q> (applied to Water)</cell><cell>Rhĕōn.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Celtic</hi> (The name of a stream in Gaul)</cell><cell><q>The Rhône.</q><note place='foot'>Many examples serve to show that the names of Streams, &amp;c., in Gaul, as preserved
by the French, are in many instances more faithful transcripts of the original Celtic appellations
than the names preserved by Latin writers.</note></cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='ApA082'/><anchor id='PgApA082'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Words for <q>Water.</q></hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Class XVI.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(20)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi></cell><cell>Doc, Dock, M'dock.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Asia.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Tribes on the <q>Jenisei</q> River, Siberia</hi></cell><cell>Dok.</cell></row>
<row><cell><hi rend='italic'>Kamschatka</hi> (The Sea)</cell><cell>Adŭcka.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>English</hi> (<q>To put under water,</q> <q>A water-fowl,</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Dr. Johnson</hi>)</cell><cell>Duck.</cell></row>
<row><cell>S. Africa.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi> (Water)</cell><cell>T'kohaa.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
The following words for <q>Water</q> seem also to be unequivocally related
viz.: <hi rend='italic'>Basque</hi>&mdash;Itsassoa; <hi rend='italic'>Negro-land</hi>&mdash;Itchi; <hi rend='italic'>Samoieds</hi>&mdash;Ija, Ja; <hi rend='italic'>South
America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Cayubabans</hi>)&mdash;Ikita; <hi rend='italic'>North America</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Katahbans</hi>)&mdash;Ejau.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='ApB001'/><anchor id='PgApB001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_B'/>
<head>Appendix B. Containing (Arranged According To The Tribes And Regions Of Africa) The
African Words Compared In Appendix A, With The Corresponding Terms In The Languages Of Asia, Europe, And
America.</head>

<pb n='ApB002'/><anchor id='PgApB002'/>

<p>
AFRICAN WORDS GEOGRAPHICALLY ARRANGED.
</p>

<p>
Fire, Sun, Day, Eye, Moon, Heaven.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Chrom, Grom, Krom, Kōh-th, from Koe, <q>To burn.</q>
<q>Sun,</q> Ra, Re.  <q>Names of the Gods of the Sun,</q> Khem, Hor,
Serapis, Osiri.  <q>Day,</q> Haou, Eoohu,&mdash;(connected with <q>Glory,</q>
Joh, Ooh, Oih, and <q>Moon,</q> Oou, <q>Lunus,</q> Joh.) <q>Eye,</q> Iri, Bal.
<q>Moon,</q> Joh, Oou. <q>Heaven,</q> Pe, Phe, <emph>plural</emph> <q>Heaven-s,</q> Neth-phe,<note place='foot'>Like the Greek, Ouranoi, <q>A <emph>singular-plural</emph>.</q></note>
Ne-pheou. <q>Name of the Goddess of the Heavens, or Firmament,</q>
Net-phe.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Nubia and Abyssinia.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Haúÿ (<hi rend='italic'>Abyss.</hi>); Ton-ih, (<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>) <q>Sun,</q>
Tuahhéy (<hi rend='italic'>Abyss.</hi>); Tôin, (<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>)  <q>Day,</q> Máaltih (<hi rend='italic'>Abyss.</hi>); Wúrabe,
(<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>) <q>Eye,</q> Aineha (<hi rend='italic'>Abyss.</hi>); Aina addela, Egôat, (<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>)
<q>Moon,</q> Wúrrhÿ (<hi rend='italic'>Abyss.</hi>); Totrig, (<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>) <q>Heaven,</q> Szemmeÿ
(<hi rend='italic'>Abyss.</hi>); Tébre, (<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Berbers and Dongolans.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Îka (<hi rend='italic'>Ber.</hi>); Îk, (<hi rend='italic'>Don.</hi>) <q>Sun,</q>
Maschékka (<hi rend='italic'>Ber.</hi>); Masilk, (<hi rend='italic'>Don.</hi>) <q>Day,</q> Ogrêska (<hi rend='italic'>Ber.</hi>);
Ogrêska, (<hi rend='italic'>Don.</hi>) <q>Eye,</q> Manga (<hi rend='italic'>Ber.</hi>); Missigh, (<hi rend='italic'>Don.</hi>) <q>Moon,</q>
O'natejá. (<hi rend='italic'>Ber.</hi>); Scharâppa, (<hi rend='italic'>Don.</hi>) <q>Heaven,</q> Szèmma (<hi rend='italic'>Ber.</hi>);
Szémma, (<hi rend='italic'>Don.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phellatahs and Fulahs.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Njite (<hi rend='italic'>Phel.</hi>); Gia-hingol, (<hi rend='italic'>Ful.</hi>) <q>Sun,</q>
Nonge (<hi rend='italic'>Phel.</hi>); Nahangue, (<hi rend='italic'>Ful.</hi>)  <q>Day,</q> Njellauma, (<hi rend='italic'>Phel.</hi>)
<q>Eye,</q> Gîteh (<hi rend='italic'>Phel.</hi>); Hyterr, (<hi rend='italic'>Ful.</hi>) <q>Moon,</q>  Liulú (<hi rend='italic'>Phel.</hi>); Leoure,
(<hi rend='italic'>Ful.</hi>) <q>Heaven,</q> Szemma (<hi rend='italic'>Phel.</hi>); Hyalla, (<hi rend='italic'>Ful.</hi>)
</p>

<pb n='ApB003'/><anchor id='PgApB003'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Negro-Land.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Jolofs and Sereres.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Safara, (<hi rend='italic'>Jol.</hi>)  <q>Sun,</q> Ghiante-finkan,
Guiante, Burhum safara (<hi rend='italic'>Jol.</hi>); Fosseye, (<hi rend='italic'>Ser.</hi>) <q>Day,</q> Lelegh,
Huer, Beuhuli, (<hi rend='italic'>Jol.</hi>)  <q>Eye,</q> Smabutt, Batte, Guitte, (<hi rend='italic'>Jol.</hi>)
<q>Moon,</q> Uhaaire, Verr, Burhum safara lionn (<hi rend='italic'>Jol.</hi>); Coll, (<hi rend='italic'>Ser.</hi>)
<q>Heaven,</q> Assaman, Assamane (<hi rend='italic'>Jol.</hi>); Rogue, (<hi rend='italic'>Ser.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mandingoes.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Deemwa.  <q>Sun,</q> and also <q>Day,</q> Teelee. <q>Day,</q>
Teelee.  <q>Eye,</q> Neay.  <q>Moon,</q> Korro, Pandintee. <q>Heaven,</q>
Santo.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Jalunkan and Sokko.</hi>&mdash;<q>Sun,</q> Telle (<hi rend='italic'>Jal.</hi>); Tillee, (<hi rend='italic'>Sok.</hi>)  <q>Moon,</q>
Karree (<hi rend='italic'>Jal.</hi>); Kalla, (<hi rend='italic'>Sok.</hi>)  <q>Heaven,</q> Margetangala (<hi rend='italic'>Jal.</hi>);
Bandee, (<hi rend='italic'>Sok.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Kanga, Mangree, and Gien.</hi>&mdash;<q>Sun,</q> Jiro (<hi rend='italic'>Kan.</hi>); Lataa (<hi rend='italic'>Man.</hi>); Jinaa,
(<hi rend='italic'>Gien.</hi>) <q>Moon,</q> Tjo (<hi rend='italic'>Kan.</hi>); Su, (<hi rend='italic'>Gien.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Fetu, Fanti; and Gold Coast.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Edjà, (<hi rend='italic'>Fetu.</hi>) <q>Sun,</q> Egwju
(<hi rend='italic'>Fetu.</hi>); Uwia, (<hi rend='italic'>G. Coast.</hi>) <q>Day,</q> Ada, (<hi rend='italic'>Fetu.</hi>) <q>Eye,</q> Enniba,
(<hi rend='italic'>Fetu.</hi>); Eniba, (<hi rend='italic'>G. Coast.</hi>) <q>Moon,</q> Osran (<hi rend='italic'>Fetu</hi>); Assara (<hi rend='italic'>G.
Coast.</hi>) <q>Heaven,</q><note place='foot'>Omitted in previous Analysis: Araiáni, <q>Heaven</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Fetu</hi>); Ouran-os, <q>Heaven</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Greek</hi>); Enniba, Eniba [above], <q>Eye.</q> [See Appendix A, pp. 42, 43.] Njame, see
Djau, <q>Heaven,</q> <q>Air</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Sanscrit</hi>); Ada, <q>Day</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Fetu</hi>); from Edja, <q>Fire,</q> Egwju,
<q>Sun</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Fetu</hi>).</note> Araiáni (<hi rend='italic'>Fetu</hi>); Njame, (<hi rend='italic'>Fanti.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Amina, Akkim, and Akripon.</hi>&mdash;<q>Sun,</q> Eiwiaa (<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>); Awia (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>); Ou,
(<hi rend='italic'>Akr.</hi>) <q>Moon,</q> Osseram (<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>); Osseranni (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>); Ofendi, (<hi rend='italic'>Akr.</hi>)
<q>Heaven,</q> Jankombum (<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>); Jahinee (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>); Aduankam, (<hi rend='italic'>Akr.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Akrai and Tambi.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> La, (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>) <q>Sun,</q> Hun (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>); Pum, (<hi rend='italic'>Tam.</hi>)
<q>Eye,</q> Hinma, (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>) <q>Moon,</q> Dubliman (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>); Horambi, (<hi rend='italic'>Tam.</hi>)
<q>Heaven,</q> Jankombum (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>); Nguai (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>); Ngoi [which means
also, <q>Thunder in the Air,</q>] (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>); Giom, (<hi rend='italic'>Tam.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Widah, Papah, and Watje.</hi>&mdash;<q>Sun,</q> Wetaga (<hi rend='italic'>Pap.</hi>); Uä, (<hi rend='italic'>Wat.</hi>) <q>Eye,</q>
Noucou [<hi rend='italic'>plural</hi>], (<hi rend='italic'>Wid.</hi>) <q>Moon,</q> Su-ede, (<hi rend='italic'>Pap.</hi>) <q>Heaven,</q>
Jiwel, (<hi rend='italic'>Pap.</hi>)
</p>

<pb n='ApB004'/><anchor id='PgApB004'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Kongo and Angola.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Tubhia (<hi rend='italic'>Kon.</hi>); Tubia (<hi rend='italic'>Kon. &amp; Ang.</hi>);
Bazou, (<hi rend='italic'>Kon.</hi>) <q>Sun,</q> N'tzai, Tangu, (<hi rend='italic'>Kon.</hi>) <q>Moon,</q> Gonde,
Gonda, (<hi rend='italic'>Kon.</hi>)  <q>Heaven,</q> Sullu (<hi rend='italic'>Kon.</hi>); Ulu, (<hi rend='italic'>Ang.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Loango, Mandongo, and Camba.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Bazu, (<hi rend='italic'>Lo.</hi>) <q>Sun,</q> Tangoa
(<hi rend='italic'>Lo.</hi>); Attaschi (<hi rend='italic'>Man.</hi>); Tango, (<hi rend='italic'>Cam.</hi>) <q>Moon,</q> Gonda (<hi rend='italic'>Lo.</hi>);
Agonne (<hi rend='italic'>Man.</hi>); Gonda, (<hi rend='italic'>Cam.</hi>) <q>Heaven,</q> Iru (<hi rend='italic'>Lo.</hi>); Sambiam-pungo
(<hi rend='italic'>Man.</hi>); Julo, (<hi rend='italic'>Cam.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Karabari, Ibo, and Mokko.</hi>&mdash;<q>Sun,</q> Anjam (<hi rend='italic'>Ka.</hi>); A-un, Anjau (<hi rend='italic'>Ibo</hi>);
Eju, (<hi rend='italic'>Mok.</hi>) <q>Moon,</q> Omma (<hi rend='italic'>Ka.</hi>); Ongma, Aoueh (<hi rend='italic'>Ibo</hi>); Affiam,
(<hi rend='italic'>Mok.</hi>) <q>Heaven,</q> Elukwee (<hi rend='italic'>Ka.</hi>); Tschukko, Ellu (<hi rend='italic'>Ibo</hi>);
Ibanju, (<hi rend='italic'>Mok.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Wawu and Tembu.</hi>&mdash;<q>Sun,</q> Jirri (<hi rend='italic'>Wa.</hi>); Wis, (<hi rend='italic'>Tem.</hi>) <q>Moon,</q> Mone
(<hi rend='italic'>Wa.</hi>); Igodu, (<hi rend='italic'>Tem.</hi>) <q>Heaven,</q> Barriadad (<hi rend='italic'>Wa.</hi>); So, (<hi rend='italic'>Tem.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Krepeers, Ashantees, and Kassenti.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Dio (<hi rend='italic'>Kre.</hi>); Egia, (<hi rend='italic'>Ash.</hi>)
<q>Sun,</q> Uwin, (<hi rend='italic'>Kas.</hi>)  <q>Eye,</q> Onuku (<hi rend='italic'>Kre.</hi>); Wannua, (<hi rend='italic'>Ash.</hi>)
<q>Moon,</q> Ungmar, (<hi rend='italic'>Kas.</hi>) <q>Heaven,</q> Ktāk, (<hi rend='italic'>Kas.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Affadeh.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Hu. <q>Sun,</q> Zú. <q>Day,</q> Phadeenszo. <q>Eye,</q> Szanko.
<q>Moon,</q> Tédi. <q>Heaven,</q> Dilko.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mobba and Schilluck.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Wussik (<hi rend='italic'>Mob.</hi>); Mâssze, (<hi rend='italic'>Sch.</hi>) <q>Sun,</q>
Engik (<hi rend='italic'>Mob.</hi>); Róongéh, (<hi rend='italic'>Sch.</hi>)  <q>Day,</q> Dalkáh, (<hi rend='italic'>Mob.</hi>)  <q>Moon,</q>
Ûk, (<hi rend='italic'>Mob.</hi>) <q>Heaven,</q> Szemma, (<hi rend='italic'>Mob.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Dâr Fûr and Dâr Runga.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Otu (<hi rend='italic'>Dâr F.</hi>); Nissiek, (<hi rend='italic'>Dâr R.</hi>)
<q>Sun,</q> Duléh (<hi rend='italic'>Dâr F.</hi>); Agñing, (<hi rend='italic'>Dâr R.</hi>) <q>Day,</q> Lô (<hi rend='italic'>Dâr F.</hi>)
<q>Eye,</q> Nûnjiéh (<hi rend='italic'>Dâr F.</hi>); Khasso, (<hi rend='italic'>Dâr R.</hi>) <q>Moon,</q> Kámmer
(<hi rend='italic'>Dâr F.</hi>); Medding, (<hi rend='italic'>Dâr R.</hi>) <q>Heaven,</q> Szémma, (<hi rend='italic'>Dâr F.</hi>)
</p>

<pb n='ApB005'/><anchor id='PgApB005'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Fire, Sun, Day, Eye, Moon, Heaven.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gallas.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Ibida. <q>Heaven,</q> Ivaq.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Madagascar.</hi>&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Lelaffu. <q>Sun,</q> Masso anro, Māssŏ andrōû. (Eye
of Day), Massoam, Massoanrü. <q>Day,</q> Arcik ando Majava, Antu,
Andru. <q>Eye,</q> Massou, Massoo, Masso, Massorohi. <q>Moon,</q>
Woelau, Volān, Bo, Bolan, Volan. <q>Heaven,</q> Atemco, Danghitsi,
Langhitsi, Lainch, Langhits.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Koossa</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Beetjuanas</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Lagoa Bay</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Caffres</hi>.&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Umlilo (<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>);
Mulélo (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>); Lilo, Leaw, (<hi rend='italic'>Caf.</hi>) <q>Sun,</q> Lélanga, (<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>);
Leetshaatsi (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>); Diambo (<hi rend='italic'>Lag. B.</hi>); Lelanga, Eliang, (<hi rend='italic'>Caf.</hi>)
<q>Day,</q> Imine (<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>); Motsichari, (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>) <q>Eye,</q> Amesligo (<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>);
Liklŏ (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>); Tewho, (<hi rend='italic'>Lag.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>B.</hi>) <q>Moon,</q> Injanga (<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>); Köhri
(<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>); Moomo (<hi rend='italic'>Lag. B.</hi>); Janga, Inyango, (<hi rend='italic'>Caf.</hi>) <q>Heaven,</q>
Isuhlu (<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>); Maaro, (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Bosjemans</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Coronas</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hottentots</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>and Saldannä Bay</hi>.&mdash;<q>Fire,</q> Tjih (<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>);
T'aib (<hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi>); T'ei, T'ei eip, Nèip, Ecy, Ei, (<hi rend='italic'>Hot.</hi>) <q>Sun,</q> T'kòăra
(<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>); Soröhb (<hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi>); Sore, Sorrie, Sorrè, Sorri, Surrie (<hi rend='italic'>Hot.</hi>);
Sore, (<hi rend='italic'>Sal. B.</hi>) <q>Day,</q> T'gaa, (<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>); Sorökŏa, (<hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi>) <q>Eye,</q>
T'saguh (<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>); Muhm (<hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi>); Mo, Mu, Mum, Moe, (<hi rend='italic'>Hot.</hi>)
<q>Moon,</q> T'káukăruh (<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>); T'khaam (<hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi>); K'cha, T'ga, Tohâ,
Kā (<hi rend='italic'>Hot.</hi>); Gam, (<hi rend='italic'>Sal. B.</hi>) <q>Heaven,</q> T'gachuh (<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>); Homma,
(<hi rend='italic'>Sal. B.</hi>)
</p>

<pb n='ApB006'/><anchor id='PgApB006'/>

<p>
Man, Woman, Human Being.
</p>

<p>
[<hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> marks Nouns Masculine; <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> Nouns Feminine; <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> words for a
Human Being, whether Male or Female.]
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>&mdash;Hoout, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> and <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Hime, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Himi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Lomi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> and <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi><note place='foot'>Also A.nah, <q>To live,</q> (Anok I.)&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Abyssinia and Nubia.</hi>&mdash;Szebbat, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Ab.</hi>); Odey, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>); Szebbey,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Ab.</hi>); Auadseh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Oták, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>); Szebbéitÿ, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Ab.</hi>);
<q>Indáki</q>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Tétakkát, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Berbers and Dongolans.</hi>&mdash;Adémga, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Ber.</hi>); Ogikh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Don.</hi>); Edinga,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Ber.</hi>); Enga, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Don.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phellatahs and Fulahs.</hi>&mdash;Nékdo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Gúrko, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Phel.</hi>); Gorko mahodo,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Ful.</hi>); Debbo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Phel.</hi>); Debo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Ful.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Negro-land</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Iolofs and Sereres.</hi>&mdash;Gour, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Garr, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Iol.</hi>); Core, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Ser.</hi>);
Goourgne, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Guiacar, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Guiaccar, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Iol.</hi>); Cow, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Ser.</hi>);
Digin, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Guiguienne, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Diguén, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Iol.</hi>); Tewe, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Ser.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mandingos.</hi>&mdash;Mo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Kea, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Fato, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Musha, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Jallunkans and Sokko.</hi>&mdash;Mogee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Jal.</hi>); Manni, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Sok.</hi>); Kai, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Jal.</hi>); Kjä, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Sok.</hi>); Musee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Jal.</hi>); Mussu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Sok.</hi>)
</p>

<pb n='ApB007'/><anchor id='PgApB007'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Kanga, Mangree, and Gien.</hi>&mdash;Ngumbo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Kan.</hi>); Mia, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Man.</hi>);
Me, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Gien</hi>); Nebeju, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Kan.</hi>); Laniu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Man.</hi>); Unsoibe, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Gien</hi>); Junoo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Kan.</hi>); Auwee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Man.</hi>); Lung, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Gien</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Fetu, Fanti, and Gold Coast.</hi>&mdash;Enipa, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Fanti</hi>); Nipa, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Baning, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>,
Bubasja, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Fetu</hi>); Hiro, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>G. Coast.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Amina, Akkim, and Akripon.</hi>&mdash;Ojippa, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>); Nippa, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Akkim</hi>);
Osse, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Akri.</hi>); Obaini, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>); Obellima, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Akkim</hi>); Unji,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Akri.</hi>); Obbaa, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>); Obia, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Akkim</hi>); Otjee, (<hi rend='italic'>Akri.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Akrai and Tambi.</hi>&mdash;Biomo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Biommo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>); Numero, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Tam.</hi>);
Nu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>); Njummu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Tam.</hi>); Nga, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, In, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Papah, and Watje.</hi>&mdash;Emme, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Pap.</hi>); Ammee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Wat.</hi>); Messuhu,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Pap.</hi>); Uzu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Wat.</hi>); Djonnu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Pap.</hi>); Jonnu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Wat.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Kongo.</hi>&mdash;Eiecala-muntu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Mundu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Ackala, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Jakkela, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Bacala,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Kentu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Quinto, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Loango, Mandongo, and Camba.</hi>&mdash;Mond, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Lo.</hi>); Mutte, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Man.</hi>);
Monami, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Cam.</hi>); Bakala, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Bakkara, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Lo.</hi>); Najalaka, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Man.</hi>); Olummi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Cam.</hi>); Kento, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Tjendo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Lo.</hi>); Okeetu,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Man.</hi>); Ukassi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Cam.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Karabari, Ibo, and Mokko.</hi>&mdash;Mad, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Kar.</hi>); Made, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Ibo.</hi>); Auwo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Mok.</hi>); Mammoku, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Kar.</hi>); Mook, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Dikkom, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Dim, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>,
(<hi rend='italic'>Ibo</hi>); Iden, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Mok.</hi>); Mangman, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Kar.</hi>); Mai, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Wei, <hi rend='italic'>F.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Ibo</hi>); Wan, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Mok.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Wawu and Tembu.</hi>&mdash;See, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Wa.</hi>); Iraa, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Tem.</hi>); Gonee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Wa.</hi>);
Ibalu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Tem.</hi>); Anna, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Wa.</hi>); Alo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Tem.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Kassenti.</hi>&mdash;Umir, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Otga, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Uppi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Affadeh.</hi>&mdash;Mágu, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Beló, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Kerim, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Schilluck.</hi>&mdash;Tabànje, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Uréh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Dâr Fûr and Dâr Runga.</hi>&mdash;Koá, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Duéh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>D. Fur.</hi>); Kamére, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>D. Run.</hi>); Jânkuèh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>D. Fur.</hi>); Mmi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>D. Run.</hi>)
</p>

<pb n='ApB008'/><anchor id='PgApB008'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Madagascar.</hi>&mdash;Oelun, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Olon, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Urun, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi>, Lelay, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Lăhē, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>,
Orrang, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Văiăve, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Bayave, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Ampele, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Koossas, Beetjuanas, Lagoa Bay, and Caffres.</hi>&mdash;Uhmto, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>);
Muhnto, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>); Monhee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>L. Bay</hi>); Monúna, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>);
Indóda, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>); Doda, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Abaandoo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Caf.</hi>); Umfási, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>); Massári, <hi rend='italic'>or</hi> Bassari, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>); Aduhast, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>L. Bay</hi>);
Omfaas, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Caf.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Bosjemans, Coronas, Hottentots, and Saldannä Bay.</hi>&mdash;T'kūi <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>);
T'kohn, <hi rend='smallcaps'>h.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi>); T'na, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>); Köuh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Kauh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Chaib, <hi rend='smallcaps'>M</hi>.
(<hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi>); Kùpp, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, K'quique, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Zohee, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Qûoique, <hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi>, Quaina,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>m.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Hot.</hi>); T'aifi, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>); Chaisas, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi>); Ankona, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Sal. B.</hi>); Honnes, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Kus, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, K'quiquis, Zohees, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>, Kȳoiquis, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi>,
Quaishha, <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Hot.</hi>)
</p>

<pb n='ApB009'/><anchor id='PgApB009'/>

<p>
Parts Of The Body, Hand, Arm, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Gig, Shig [The Hand and Fore-Arm], Koi, Mah, Mahe.
<q>Tongue,</q> Lash. <q>Ear,</q> Meeje.<note place='foot'>The great majority of the African words for the Nose (a class not included in
Appendix A) have been explained in other parts of this work.</note> <q>Nose,</q> Sha. <q>Foot,</q> Rat,
[I, <q>To go.</q>] <q>Head,</q> Kahi, Jo.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Abyssinia and Nubia.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Tedémbetôn, (<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>) <q>Tongue,</q> Mülhassh
(<hi rend='italic'>Abyss.</hi>); E'midáp, (<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>) <q>Ear,</q> A'shinhá (<hi rend='italic'>Abyss.</hi>); Ishenáh,
Wongwil, (<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>) <q>Nose,</q> Affinkjáha (<hi rend='italic'>Abyss.</hi>); A'ffinkjách, Ognûf,
(<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>)  <q>Foot,</q> Tarékkas (<hi rend='italic'>Abyss.</hi>); Regget, (<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>) <q>Head,</q>
Râassih (<hi rend='italic'>Abyss.</hi>); Dimmáha, O'gürmá, (<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Berbers and Dongolans.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Iddegh (<hi rend='italic'>Ber.</hi>); Ihg, (<hi rend='italic'>Don.</hi>) <q>Tongue,</q>
Nárka (<hi rend='italic'>Ber.</hi>); Nádka, (<hi rend='italic'>Don.</hi>) <q>Ear,</q> U'kkegá (<hi rend='italic'>Ber.</hi>); Ulûk, (<hi rend='italic'>Don.</hi>)
<q>Nose,</q> Szurringa, (<hi rend='italic'>Ber. &amp; Don.</hi>) <q>Foot,</q> Oèntúga (<hi rend='italic'>Ber.</hi>); Ossentuge,
(<hi rend='italic'>Don.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phellatahs and Fulahs.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Néworéh (<hi rend='italic'>Phel.</hi>); Youngo, (<hi rend='italic'>Ful.</hi>)
<q>Tongue,</q> Démgal (<hi rend='italic'>Phel.</hi>); D'heingall, (<hi rend='italic'>Ful.</hi>) <q>Ear,</q> Nuppi (<hi rend='italic'>Phel.</hi>)
Noppy, (<hi rend='italic'>Ful.</hi>) <q>Nose,</q> Njelhinerát (<hi rend='italic'>Phel.</hi>); Hener, (<hi rend='italic'>Ful.</hi>) <q>Foot,</q>
Kússengál (<hi rend='italic'>Phel.</hi>); Kavassongal, (<hi rend='italic'>Ful.</hi>) <q>Head,</q> Hóre (<hi rend='italic'>Phel.</hi>);
Horde, (<hi rend='italic'>Ful.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Negro-land.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Iolofs and Sereres.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Loho, Loco [properly the Arm], Lokoo
(<hi rend='italic'>Iol.</hi>); Bayie, (<hi rend='italic'>Ser.</hi>) <q>Tongue,</q> Laming, Lamai, Lammegue, Lamin
(<hi rend='italic'>Iol.</hi>); Delemme, (<hi rend='italic'>Ser.</hi>) <q>Ear,</q> Smanoppe, Nope, Noppe (<hi rend='italic'>Iol.</hi>);
Noffe, (<hi rend='italic'>Ser.</hi>) <q>Nose,</q> Smak-bookan, Bacann, Boucanne, Baccané
(<hi rend='italic'>Iol.</hi>); Guisse, (<hi rend='italic'>Ser.</hi>) <q>Foot,</q> Simatank, Tangue (<hi rend='italic'>Iol.</hi>); Guiaf,
(<hi rend='italic'>Ser.</hi>) <q>Head,</q> Smababb, Boppe, Bappe, Bop (<hi rend='italic'>Iol.</hi>); Coque, (<hi rend='italic'>Ser.</hi>).
</p>

<pb n='ApB010'/><anchor id='PgApB010'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mandingos.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Bulla, Boula [Hand and Arm]. <q>Tongue,</q> Ning.
<q>Ear,</q> Toola. <q>Nose,</q> Noong. <q>Foot,</q> Sing. <q>Head,</q> Kung,
Koon.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Jallunkans and Sokko.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Ibolee (<hi rend='italic'>Jal.</hi>); Bulla, Blu, (<hi rend='italic'>Sok.</hi>)
<q>Foot,</q> Itgenge (<hi rend='italic'>Jal.</hi>); Afo, (<hi rend='italic'>Sok.</hi>) <q>Head,</q> Ikkunjee (<hi rend='italic'>Jal.</hi>);
Ukkung, (<hi rend='italic'>Sok.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Kanga, Mangree, and Gien.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Nakoa (<hi rend='italic'>Kan.</hi>); Ikko, (<hi rend='italic'>Gien.</hi>)
<q>Foot,</q> Namboo (<hi rend='italic'>Kan.</hi>); Trippi (<hi rend='italic'>Man.</hi>); Nugee, (<hi rend='italic'>Gien.</hi>) <q>Head,</q>
Nandewu (<hi rend='italic'>Kan.</hi>); Tri (<hi rend='italic'>Man.</hi>); Ungo, (<hi rend='italic'>Gien.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Fetu and Gold Coast.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Ensah, (<hi rend='italic'>Fetu.</hi>) <q>Tongue,</q> Teckremà
(<hi rend='italic'>Fetu</hi>); Decrame, (<hi rend='italic'>G. Coast.</hi>) <q>Ear,</q> Asschaba (<hi rend='italic'>Fetu</hi>); Asso,
(<hi rend='italic'>G. Coast.</hi>) <q>Nose,</q> Engvvinni (<hi rend='italic'>Fetu</hi>); O-u-nom, (<hi rend='italic'>G. Coast.</hi>)
<q>Foot,</q> Anan, (<hi rend='italic'>Fetu.</hi>) <q>Head,</q> Etyr (<hi rend='italic'>Fetu</hi>); Eteri, (<hi rend='italic'>G. Coast.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Amina, Akkim, and Akripon.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> En-saa, Obaa (<hi rend='italic'>Am. &amp; Akkim</hi>);
Obaa, (<hi rend='italic'>Akri.</hi>) <q>Foot,</q> Onang (<hi rend='italic'>Am. &amp; Akkim</hi>); Djabi, (<hi rend='italic'>Akri.</hi>)
<q>Head,</q> Utieri (<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>); Metih (<hi rend='italic'>Akkim</hi>); Nuntji, (<hi rend='italic'>Akri.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Akrai and Tambi.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Nindeh, Dinde, Nindé (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>); Nindi, (<hi rend='italic'>Tam.</hi>)
<q>Arm,</q> Nindeh, (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>) <q>Ear,</q> Toy, (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>) <q>Foot,</q> Nanne, Nandé,
(<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>); Nandi, (<hi rend='italic'>Tam.</hi>) <q>Head,</q> Ithu, Oitju (<hi rend='italic'>Ak.</hi>); Ii, (<hi rend='italic'>Tam.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Widah, Papah, and Watje.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Alo (<hi rend='italic'>Wid.</hi>); Allo (<hi rend='italic'>Pap.</hi>); Aschi,
(<hi rend='italic'>Wat.</hi>) <q>Ears,</q> Otto, (<hi rend='italic'>Wid.</hi>) <q>Nose,</q> Aonty, (<hi rend='italic'>Wid.</hi>) <q>Foot,</q>
Affo (<hi rend='italic'>Wid.</hi>); Afo, (<hi rend='italic'>Pap. &amp; Wat.</hi>) <q>Head,</q> Ta, (<hi rend='italic'>Pap. &amp; Wat.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Kongo and Angolan.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Moco [<hi rend='italic'>pl.</hi>], Kook, Coco, (<hi rend='italic'>Kon.</hi>) <q>Foot,</q>
Malu (<hi rend='italic'>Kon.</hi>); Quirio, (<hi rend='italic'>An.</hi>) <q>Head,</q> Ontu, (<hi rend='italic'>Kon.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Loango, Mandongo, and Camba.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Kogo (<hi rend='italic'>Lo.</hi>); Koko, (<hi rend='italic'>Man. &amp;
Cam.</hi>) <q>Foot,</q> Kulu (<hi rend='italic'>Lo. &amp; Cam.</hi>); Kolo, (<hi rend='italic'>Man.</hi>) <q>Head,</q> Tu (<hi rend='italic'>Lo.</hi>);
Motu, (<hi rend='italic'>Man. &amp; Cam.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Karabari, Ibo, and Mokko.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Okuh (<hi rend='italic'>Kar.</hi>); Hukko (<hi rend='italic'>Ibo</hi>); Ono-nuba,
(<hi rend='italic'>Mok.</hi>) <q>Foot,</q> Akkah (<hi rend='italic'>Kar.</hi>); Akkau (<hi rend='italic'>Ibo</hi>); Ugod, (<hi rend='italic'>Mok.</hi>)
<q>Head,</q> Issi (<hi rend='italic'>Kar. &amp; Ibo</hi>); Iboil, (<hi rend='italic'>Mok.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Wawu and Tembu.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Be (<hi rend='italic'>Wa.</hi>); Nin, (<hi rend='italic'>Tem.</hi>) <q>Foot,</q> Gann
(<hi rend='italic'>Wa.</hi>); Navorre, (<hi rend='italic'>Tem.</hi>) <q>Head,</q> Angoru (<hi rend='italic'>Wa.</hi>); Kujuoo, (<hi rend='italic'>Tem.</hi>)
</p>

<pb n='ApB011'/><anchor id='PgApB011'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Krepeer, Ashantees, and Kassenti.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Inno, (<hi rend='italic'>Kas.</hi>) <q>Arm,</q> Assij
(<hi rend='italic'>Kre.</hi>); Osa, (<hi rend='italic'>Ash.</hi>) <q>Ear,</q> Otuh (<hi rend='italic'>Kre.</hi>); Uwasso, (<hi rend='italic'>Ash.</hi>) <q>Nose,</q>
Amonthi (<hi rend='italic'>Kre.</hi>); Ohüny, (<hi rend='italic'>Ash.</hi>) <q>Foot,</q> Itta, (<hi rend='italic'>Kas.</hi>) <q>Head,</q>
Ota (<hi rend='italic'>Kre.</hi>); Otri (<hi rend='italic'>Ash.</hi>); Dür, (<hi rend='italic'>Kas.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Affadeh.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Blimszeh. <q>Tongue,</q> Essiénkó. <q>Ear,</q> Szémmankó.
<q>Nose,</q> Démulzungenkó. <q>Foot,</q> E'nszih. <q>Head,</q> Go, Ko.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Dâr Fûr and Dâr Runga.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Enkeffy [Surface of the Hand],
(<hi rend='italic'>D. Fur.</hi>) <q>Tongue,</q> Dali, (<hi rend='italic'>D. Fur.</hi>) <q>Ear,</q> Dilá (<hi rend='italic'>D. Fur.</hi>);
Nesso, (<hi rend='italic'>D. Run.</hi>) <q>Nose,</q> Dürméh, (<hi rend='italic'>D. Fur.</hi>) <q>Foot,</q> Tárinmúfsaly
(<hi rend='italic'>D. Fur.</hi>); Itar, (<hi rend='italic'>D. Run.</hi>) <q>Head,</q> Tabú, (<hi rend='italic'>D. Fur.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Beetjuana-Caffres, Corona-Hottentots, and Madagascar.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> T'koam
(<hi rend='italic'>Cor.-Hot.</hi>); Tang'am, (<hi rend='italic'>Mad.</hi>) <q>Tongue,</q> Lolemi (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.-Kaf.</hi>);
Lella, Leula, (<hi rend='italic'>Mad.</hi>) <q>Ears,</q> Zébe (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.-Kaf.</hi>); Soffi, (<hi rend='italic'>Mad.</hi>)
<q>Nose,</q> Ongko, (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.-Kaf.</hi>); Orong, (<hi rend='italic'>Mad.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Madagascar.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Tang'am, Tangan, Tangh. <q>Tongue,</q> Lella, Leula,
Lēlã, Lela. <q>Ear,</q> Souffy, Soofi. <q>Nose,</q> Orung, Urun, Oron.
<q>Foot,</q> Hoots, Lefack, Ungoor, Lafatungu, Tombut, <q>Head,</q> Loha,
Dooha, Lua.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Koosas, Beetjuanas, Lagoa Bay, and Caffres.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> Mundha (<hi rend='italic'>L. Bay</hi>);
Fansa (<hi rend='italic'>Caf.</hi>); Isanga (<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>); Sseaakja, (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>) <q>Tongue,</q> Mume
(<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>); Lolémi (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>); Loodjem, (<hi rend='italic'>L. Bay.</hi>) <q>Ear,</q> Elébe (<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>);
Zébe (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>); Gevea, (<hi rend='italic'>L. Bay.</hi>) <q>Nose,</q> Poomlu (<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>); Ongkŏ
(<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>); Numpho, (<hi rend='italic'>L. Bay.</hi>) <q>Foot,</q> Jénjăo (<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>); Lónao (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>);
Chizenda (<hi rend='italic'>L. Bay</hi>); Enjau, (<hi rend='italic'>Caf.</hi>) <q>Head,</q> Klogo (<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>); Kŏhho
(<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>); Lücko (<hi rend='italic'>L. Bay</hi>); Loko, (<hi rend='italic'>Caf.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Bosjemans, Coronas, Hottentots, and Saldannä Bay.</hi>&mdash;<q>Hand,</q> T'aa (<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>);
T'kŏám (<hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi>); Onecoa (<hi rend='italic'>Sal. B.</hi>); T'unka, Omma, (<hi rend='italic'>Hot.</hi>) <q>Tongue,</q>
T'in (<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>); Tamma (<hi rend='italic'>Cor. &amp; Hot.</hi>); Tamme, (<hi rend='italic'>Sal. B.</hi>) <q>Ear,</q>
T'no-cingtu (<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>); T'naum (<hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi>); Naho (<hi rend='italic'>Sal. B.</hi>); Nouw [<hi rend='italic'>pl.</hi>],
(<hi rend='italic'>Hot.</hi>) <q>Nose,</q> T'nuhntu (<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>); T'geub (<hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi>); Tui, Zakui (<hi rend='italic'>Sal. B.</hi>);
T'koi, Koyb, Qui, Ture, Thuké, Qûoi, (<hi rend='italic'>Hot.</hi>) <q>Foot,</q> T'oóah
(<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>); T'keib (<hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi>); Coap (<hi rend='italic'>Sal. B.</hi>); Y, Itqua, Yi, (<hi rend='italic'>Hot.</hi>)
<q>Head,</q> T'naa (<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>); Minuong (<hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi>); Biquäau, Biqua, Bigûa, (<hi rend='italic'>Hot.</hi>)
</p>

<pb n='ApB012'/><anchor id='PgApB012'/>

<p>
Water.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>North Africa.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Egypt.</hi>&mdash;<q>Aquæ,</q> Eiooue, Mōou, Mau. <q>Seas,</q> Amaiou. <q>Rain,</q> Mou-noshe.
<q>A Torrent, A Stream,</q> Mouns-ōr. em. <q>To irrigate, To
drink,</q> Matsos. <q>A Stream,</q> Eioor, Erōn.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Abyssinia and Arabia.</hi>&mdash;Mi (<hi rend='italic'>Abyss.</hi>); Me, Ejern, (<hi rend='italic'>Nub.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Berbers and Dongolans.</hi>&mdash;Amánga (<hi rend='italic'>Ber.</hi>); Esseg, (<hi rend='italic'>Don.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Negro-land.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Iolofs.</hi>&mdash;M'doch, Doc, Dock.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mandingos.</hi>&mdash;Ji, Gee,
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Fetu and Gold Coast.</hi>&mdash;Ensu (<hi rend='italic'>Fetu</hi>); Enchion, (<hi rend='italic'>G. Coast.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Akrai.</hi>&mdash;Nuh.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Widah.</hi>-Asioué.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Kongo and Angola.</hi>&mdash;Masa (<hi rend='italic'>Kon. &amp; Ang.</hi>); Mazia, (<hi rend='italic'>Ang.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Loango.</hi>&mdash;Mazei.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Krepeer and Ashantees.</hi>&mdash;Itchi (<hi rend='italic'>Kre.</hi>); Inssuo, (<hi rend='italic'>Ash.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Affadeh.</hi>&mdash;Améh.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mobba and Schilluck.</hi>&mdash;E'ndschÿ (<hi rend='italic'>Mob.</hi>); Mage [also Cold], (<hi rend='italic'>Sch.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Dâr Fûr and Dâr Runga.</hi>&mdash;Kóro, (<hi rend='italic'>D. Fûr</hi>); Tta, (<hi rend='italic'>D. Run.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>South Africa.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gallas.</hi>&mdash;Bischan.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Madagascar.</hi>&mdash;Rano, Rana, Ranü.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Koosas, Beetjuanas, Lagoa Bay, and Caffres.</hi>&mdash;Ammaansi (<hi rend='italic'>Koos.</hi>);
Meetsi (<hi rend='italic'>Beet.</hi>); Matce (<hi rend='italic'>Lag. B.</hi>); Maasi, Ammanzu, (<hi rend='italic'>Caf.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Huswanas.</hi>&mdash;T'kaē.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Bosjemans, Coronas, Hottentots, and Saldannä Bay.</hi>&mdash;T'kohaa (<hi rend='italic'>Bos.</hi>),
T'kamma (<hi rend='italic'>Cor. &amp; Hot.</hi>); Kamma, Kamme, Kām (<hi rend='italic'>Hot.</hi>); Ouata,
(<hi rend='italic'>Sal. Bay.</hi>)
</p>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
